All Girls Want Bad Boys: She was drawn to Jimmy/Steve over Tony because of this. This is most evident when right after Tony pulls them over (in a stolen car) for speeding, Jimmy/Steve does some illegal plays and Fiona is noticeably turned on by his display of criminal acumen. Hell, Jimmy/Steve won her favor the second time by revealing that he was a car thief. This also plays a part in why it doesn't work out with Mike in Season 4 or Gus in Season 5.
All-Loving Hero: While she has her rough patches, Fiona is one of the most generous and considerate characters in the entire show.
Anguished Declaration of Love: She gives one to Gus in "Uncle Carl" to beg him to stay instead of going on tour without her, but it doesn't work, and their marriage doesn't last much longer.
Big Sister Instinct: Don't touch any of her siblings. In Episode 2 of Season 1, after Frank headbutts Ian, she warns him that if he ever hits one of "her kids" again, she'll end him.
Break the Cutie: In Season 4. Well, to be realistic, the show's been breaking Fiona since day one (remember that scene where she congratulates herself for a good day's work before breaking to tears?), but in Season 4 it's taken up to eleven.
Broken Tears: When she takes enough abuse and breaks down enough to cry, this is what they are. Her tears are heart-wrenching, mostly because they're rare and the situations are so miserable.
Calling the Old Man Out: Does this numerous times to both Frank and Monica, but special mention should go to her speech to Monica at the end of Season 1, when Monica tries to take Liam away. It's awesome.
Can't Get Away with Nuthin': Makes quite a few bad decisions in Season 4, but none that leads to anything harrowing until she decides to keep and snort Robbie's cocaine instead of throwing it away. Liam gets into it, leading to his hospitalization and almost dying. Fiona herself is arrested, eventually put on house arrest, has trouble finding a job because of her status as a felon, and even her siblings briefly turn away from her.
Cool Big Sis: Her younger siblings all look up to her in one way or the other.
Deadpan Snarker: As a Gallagher, she naturally excels at snark.
Fiona: (to Robbie) You call me when I'm with Mike, text me when I'm with Mike… why don't we just, cut off the middle man which is me and, you can fuck your brother.
The Determinator: You cannot stop Fiona Gallagher, especially when her family is involved.
Ethical Slut: She sees no shame in being sexually promiscuous in her personal life. Assuming she's a prostitute or that she's alright with cat-calling or harassment is a non-family Berserk Button for her, however. She broke down in tears after having to wear a stomach baring cheerleader outfit for a sleazy sports bar with handsy patrons, and this is a woman who is comfortable with her dad giving her partners condoms.
Even the Girls Want Her: A fair amount of plot stems from this. If the character doesn't have the last name Gallagher, you can assume they are attracted to Fiona. One of the most egregious examples was Jasmine, who was set up as a Distaff Counterpart to her boyfriend, Jimmy/Steve, being overly generous, mysterious about their intentions, and harboring a desire to sleep with her (and expressing it).
Good Bad Girl: She's successful sexually like all of the Gallaghers, accruing a wide variety of partners. When teased about sleeping with nearly a hundred guys, she responds that it's only 95. She's also a responsible guardian to five kids (plus whomever the Gallaghers are sheltering on a week by week basis).
Hard-Drinking Party Girl: Despite being the most stable and sane Gallagher, when she gets to go out she usually parties hard. It's pretty harmless and normal until her decision to keep Robbie's cocaine leads to Liam's hospitalization and the end of a stable career path, and after failing to find a new job, she ends up going off the deep end, partying hard at Robbie's home before waking up somewhere she doesn't recognize with no memory of the night before, leading the family to search for her as they so often had to do with Frank.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With her neighbor and best friend Veronica.
Idiot Ball:
Despite her relatively young age, she's the most responsible parent the kids could have asked for… Until she decides to leave cocaine lying out with a curious toddler running around.
Smart, savvy Fiona, who has already shown plenty of business acumen with managing the diner, is downright shocked when she hastily buys the dumpy, seedy laundromat, only to find that it needs repairs costing thousands. Not to mention that after the Gallaghers already faced homelessness, she puts the house up for collateral without telling anyone first.
It's All About Me:
While her heart is in the right place, she tends to blame herself for her siblings' problems that she has nothing to do with. Debbie at one point even asks her, "Why does everything need to be about you?".
Having to raise her siblings and make all the decisions for the family from a very young age almost inevitably results in an adult Fiona who believes she is at the center of every issue in her family, that every choice she makes is the right one, and that every decision her siblings make requires either her approval or involvement. As Debbie and her brothers get older, this starts to grate with them more.
Jerkass Has a Point: In late season 5 and early Season 6. Fiona is incredibly unsupportive of Debbie’s pregnancy, but Fiona’s arguments are valid because Debbie was 15 and too young have a child, also she played a part into tricking Derek (the boy she barley knew) for impregnating her.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She takes zero bullshit and can be quite harsh and blunt, but is deeply devoted to those she holds close to her heart.
Knight Templar Big Sister: Hurt any of her siblings and she will end you.
Mama Bear: To her siblings. Especially invoked with Carl, Debbie, and Liam, as the younger siblings who would've all been very young (and unborn, in Liam's case) when Fiona took over the family.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: With Jimmy/Steve. It's lampshaded various times, particularly by Frank.
Lawyer: (looks at Fiona and Jimmy/Steve) Who are these?
Frank: My daughter and… her girlfriend.
Misery Poker: It's undeniable that Fiona has had an incredibly hard life, but she has a tendency to believe that her experiences are as bad as it could possibly get for anyone and is often unsympathetic to people she thinks just need to work hard like she did to get out of their problems. When she and Ian have a major falling out over her finagling an abandoned church for a property development when Ian wanted to turn it into a shelter for homeless queer youth, Fiona explicitly compares her life to theirs and says she never had anybody to help her and made it out fine, ignoring the fact that many of the teens in question were kicked out of home by their families and weren't able to fall back on being a young, conventionally attractive white woman to secure club promoting jobs like she could.
Ms. Fanservice: She regularly appears onscreen in very revealing and/or non-existent clothing. She's often seen naked while getting dressed or walking around in her underwear, and has plenty of sex scenes.
My Own Private "I Do": In Season 5, she impulsively marries Gus, a musician she had only recently met, after what she describes as an "all day sex bender." It doesn't work out.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Her main plot of Season 4 revolves around how badly she manages to screw up after finally starting to get things right in her life. She loses her stable job, cheats on her faithful boyfriend with his brother, accidentally causes her toddler brother to overdose on cocaine, and goes to prison. All of that over one season.
No Accounting for Taste: Seems to attract criminals, cowards, or other morally deficient or irresponsible individuals. She has realized it and has gotten pretty used to the men in her life abandoning/disappointing her.
Veronica: Why are all the men you date pussies?
Fiona: They are what they eat. (waggles tongue between her fingers)
Only Sane Woman: Until Season 4, at least. She "gets her shit together", as she says, by the end of the season though.
OOC Is Serious Business: The only time she's ever called Frank "Dad" was at Thanksgiving after Monica slits her wrists and she needs his help to figure out what medication she's taking, underscoring how dire the situation is.
Promotion to Parent: Since Frank and Monica are a pair of irresponsible deadbeats, Fiona's been looking after her younger siblings for her whole life. This gets deconstructed more as the series goes on. Earlier seasons don't shy away from the stress Fiona has placed on her, but she keeps her head above water, and bravely and selflessly secures guardianship of the other children without much hesitation in Season 3. Season 4 sees her already getting overwhelmed and getting frustrated that nothing is ever about her, and by Season 7, she asserts that she's "done mothering everyone" – a far cry from her conversation with the judge while securing guardianship, where she accepts that she'll have to take care of them for most of her life.
Proud Beauty: She enjoys dressing sexily when she goes out or is spending time with her boyfriends.
Put on a Bus: She ultimately decides to leave Chicago at the end of Season 9, having decided her family has matured enough to fend for themselves and that she needs to go on her path. Before she leaves, she gives her family a large amount of money to support themselves.
Really Gets Around: Kev once commented she was nicknamed "First Date Fiona". She took no shame in that nickname.
Relative Error: A parent-child example, rather than siblings. She and Frank are mistaken for a couple on at least two occasions, much to the disgust of both of them.
Sex Goddess: We see Fiona get busy a lot, and she's always portrayed as being a very satisfying lover.
Stepford Smiler: A more positive portrayal than normal. No matter how tragic or terrible the situation is, Fiona keeps on smiling and pretending it's all fine for the sake of her siblings.
Took a Level in Dumbass: Fiona is very street smart, even bordering on the Guile Hero at times, but this happens to her numerous times.
A justified example would be her downward spiral in Season 4 after all Fiona's efforts to get parental rights in Season 3. She leaves cocaine out, which Liam ingests after cheating on Robbie. However, she herself is going through a very rough time.
The clearest example of this trope, though, is Season 7. Despite how close they came to losing the house in Season 2, she puts it up as collateral for her own poorly-conceived business venture.
Season 9, too. She goes bankrupt by crashing her car after finding out about Ford being married.
Took a Level in Jerkass:
Season 7. Fiona risks homelessness for all the Gallaghers by putting the house up as collateral.
Season 9. After finding out Ford is married (a dick move), she goes absolutely apeshit, committing assault and being humiliated by just about everyone around her as they try to call her out.
Tough Love: She frequently practices this with her siblings. One standout example comes in "The F Word" where she tells Debbie in no uncertain terms that she will not be responsible for Debbie's baby if she goes through with becoming a teen mom. She follows through on her threat following Franny's birth, as after instinctively cleaning Debbie's room she then brings it back to the way she found it, and later demands that Debbie help contribute to paying for living expenses or she'll be kicked out. When Debbie asks how she can possibly raise her child while finding full-time work, Fiona states it's not her problem.
Tragic Dropout: Having to take care of all of her siblings prevented her from finishing high-school, and her job opportunities and financial situation repeatedly suffer as a result. She gets her GED at the end of Season 2.
Trauma Conga Line: While her life is generally crappy. the fallout of her mistakes during Season 4 is a particularly nasty variant of this. Her cheating on Mike with his troubled brother Robbie leads to an unhappy breakup with one of her few decent boyfriends, leading to her realization that she doesn't deserve nice men. Though she manages to keep her job, she loses it anyway after she leaves some cocaine out, which Liam accidentally ingests and almost dies from, leading her to be labeled a felon. She's arrested, has the family briefly turn away from her, goes under house arrest involving having to urinate in front of her probation officer, has trouble finding a job under her felon status, and then gets a dressing-down from Mike's sister in front of all of her old coworkers. This culminates in her going off the rails at Robbie's home and ending up in a rather Frank-like situation. Fortunately, she comes out stronger at the end of the season.
Unkempt Beauty: She's a Head-Turning Beauty, but she's often so tired and overworked that she neglects to brush her hair or get adequate sleep and often has an unkempt appearance as a result.
Unwanted Assistance: One of her problems is that she refuses to ask for help, even when Jimmy/Steve offers to help her out. Part of it is cause she doesn't want to rely on someone to the point that when she needs them the most, they're gone.