Abusive Parents:
Neglects Debbie, Carl and Liam, emotionally abuses Fiona and Lip, and physically abuses Ian. He also had them himself, in the form of his mother.
Tries to strangle Debbie in the Season 7 finale when he learns she has hidden his drugs.
Addled Addict: By the last season, Frank's drinking has caught up to him and he suffers from alcoholic dementia, causing him to lose his memory and get lost. This is unexpectedly hard to watch, because Frank has spent the whole series getting in scrapes and seemingly cheating death. By the last season, he's a sad old man who shits himself and cries.
The Alcoholic: Doubles as an Alcoholic Parent. Any money Frank can get his hands on inevitably go towards alcohol or other substances, and spends most of his time either drunk, hungover or both. Even learning in Season 3 that his alcoholism is literally killing him doesn't stop him, and it takes being physically unable to ingest any alcohol (because he coughs up blood when he does!) to force him off it. He swaps alcohol for vast quantities of pot, Oxycontin, heroin, and crack. Once he gets a new liver at the end of Season 4, he begins drinking again, although his aforementioned drug use seems to have helped him to succeed in significantly cutting down on his booze intake for the long-term. His boozing is so extreme that when he's cremated, his body is so soaked in alcohol that he blows up the oven.
All Take and No Give: Leeches off of anyone willing to tolerate him, not paying anyone back.
Altar the Speed: Marries Sheila on his deathbed in Season 4.
Ambiguously Bi:
When he believes a female doctor and her two male residents are propositioning him for sex, he's hesitant, saying that "it's been a while since [he's] been with a dude, never mind two".
Frank prostitutes himself at a local gay bar.
While high, he mistakes Steve for a woman and lusts after 'her.' When he finds out 'she' is a man, Frank doesn't seem to mind.
When asked if he's gay, Frank replies with "I am whatever I need to be at the time I need to be it".
Ass Shove: His relationship with Sheila leads to him being on the receiving end of this a lot. It works to his advantage when he wakes up in Mexico after a drunken bender and becomes a drug mule just to get back to the United States. His capacity for, er, storing foreign objects results in him being able to smuggle more drugs than any mule before him, earning him the nickname "El Gran Canon".
Billy Needs an Organ: A major plot point of Season 4 is he needs a liver.
Body Horror: An understated, realistic example – Frank's not a well man, and decades of living on the fringes of society and constant alcohol/drug abuse have left him more or less rotting from the inside. His many years of alcoholism cause cirrhosis and jaundice to set in as his liver begins failing in Season 3; Sammi shoots him in the arm (hitting his cubital vein) and rubs salt in the wound when his dismissive abuse gets too much for her to take; he survives falling into a freezing river after his family attempts to murder him once and for all, but is left in a coma with temporary amnesia; he burns himself trying to set fire to a homeless shelter; to top it all off, he briefly starts smoking meth in Season 8. Season 9 ups the ante even more: his transplant liver's already starting to have problems, he's revealed to have made himself sterile through sheer chemical abuse, and prostituting himself to the PTA causes an outbreak of venereal disease. By the time of his death, his alcohol-induced dementia reduces him to a feeble, incontinent shell of his former self; he falls into another coma trying to commit suicide by OD, and his bout with COVID-19 is extremely short because he's got basically no immune system left. The man's entire life is one long, cruel Rasputinian Death.
Brilliant, but Lazy: He's no Einstein, but he can be exceptionally clever when he needs to be, if only when scheming for his own personal gain. His children are also shocked to discover how smart he was when he was young, something that's long been eradicated by his addictions and lack of responsibility.
Butt-Monkey: While he never suffers the way he should, Frank often deludes himself into thinking his life is a series of lucky breaks when it's clear to everybody how much of a pathetic wastrel he really is. He's been pegged against his will, smuggled to Canada, locked in prison, thrown out the street, beaten up by practically everybody he knows, thrown out the street, sleeps wherever he can, is hated by everybody, frequently fails in his scams, is never taken seriously, thrown out the street… People may want him dead (and with good reason), but nobody envies his life.
The Charmer: Zigzagged. Although he's superficially charismatic, he's such a wastrel that everybody's patience for him has long since evaporated. Though when he really needs something, he can turn it on and get people to help him out.
Cheated Death, Died Anyway: Frank has cheated death many, many times, like when he nearly dies of liver failure, gets the liver, and immediately starts drinking again. But a particularly abrupt version occurs in the series finale, where he survives his attempted suicide by OD, then catches COVID and dies in the hospital.
Cloud Cuckoolander: He often goes off on nonsensical rants, often about things only tangentially related to what everyone else is talking about.
Comedic Sociopathy: Zig-zagged. His behavior can go from a Funny Moment to realistically depressing and serious, sometimes within the same episode.
Consummate Liar: While many residents know him well and know he's full of it, he's an exceptionally good liar (well, he is a sociopath) and has tricked a lot of people over the course of the series.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Downplayed as he's brighter than he appears. When sober he's actually quite a tough fighting opponent, giving Sean a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown although Sean does get in a few good hits in too.
Damned by Faint Praise: Lip refers to him as the "good" parent in comparison to Monica. Despite Frank's abusive tendencies, he, for the most part, is present in his children's lives, if only for his own selfish reasons.
Deadpan Snarker: Most of his nonsensical rants often come accompanied with a bit of snark, trademark of the Gallagher family.
Dirty Coward: Whenever the going gets tough, Frank is the first one out of the door. The best example is when Monica attempted suicide; you see Jimmy, Kevin, Veronica and Fiona leap into action as Frank shuffles out the backdoor.
Doting Grandparent: For Franny occasionally, mostly because she's named after him and that appeals to his narcissistic personality. In Season 11, Frank brings her on his business around town (instead of taking her to preschool) and the two have a surprisingly nice day together.
Drugs Are Bad: Barely functional thanks to his "extensive experience," and he becomes even worse when he's drunk, or wanting to get high.
Easily Forgiven: Averted; almost everyone in Chicago seems to have had a bad experience with Frank and want nothing to do with him, and those who have helped him in the past seem to have wised up. However, there are some examples in earlier season where he's warmly received by his family, at Veronica and Kevin's fake wedding reception, and at the marijuana bonfire, where Fiona playfully ruffles his hair – the latter happening in the same episode where the Gallaghers had to rescue Liam after Frank loses him in a bet.
Entitled Bastard: Despite treating his children like absolute shit, he expects them to allow him to live in their house and gets angry with them when they reasonably voice their contempt for him.
Even Evil Can Be Loved: At the end of the series – when all his other children grow to hate him and largely don't care if he dies, Liam still cares about Frank. In the series finale, when Frank goes missing after he tried to commit suicide, Liam is the only one who goes looking for him.
Even Evil Has Standards:
He's deeply disturbed when Karen forces him to have sex with her. He even questions what the age of consent is, and ends it with her because he can't ruin Lip's relationship with her.
In "Summertime", he tries to save Liam from being taken from Baby.
Final Speech: His is in the form of a voiceover, also Bookends with the opening voice over in the pilot.
Freudian Excuse: His mother was pretty horrible, physically abusing him and regularly telling him that she wished he was never born.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He enjoys this status among the other barflies at the Alibi.
Frank: Guys, can you spot me?
Tommy: We fucking hate you, Frank.
Functional Addict: He see-saws between this and being a full-blown incontinent Addled Addict.
Hair-Trigger Temper: He once headbutted Ian because Ian asked him if Frank was wearing his shirt, which Frank was.
Hate Sink: Honestly, one of the only points of Frank's continuous existence is to be a horrible human being for everyone to despise and to make the Gallagher children sympathetic for tolerating him.
Hates Being Alone: It’s implied that despite the fact he’s a terrible dad, he still wants to be involved in his kids' lives because he wants to feel appreciated by them – even in the slightest way.
Hidden Depths: His brother reveals to Lip and Ian that he was actually a devout and intelligent youth.
Ignored Epiphany:
His Near-Death Experience in Season 4 should've taught him a lesson not only on not drinking anymore (since he physically can't), but on taking responsibilities seriously. However, he chooses to ignore this, runs away from the hospital and starts drinking whiskey by his own on the outskirts of town.
From Season 5 onwards, he has successfully cut down on the boozing, but only by replacing it with a variety of other drugs, particularly weed and Oxycontin.
Insult Backfire: Ian is getting drunk every day. Fiona says it's the result of bad parenting. Frank bemusedly replies, "Don't be so hard on yourself."
It's All About Me: His defining characteristic, everything else stems from his extreme selfishness.
Jerkass: He's an incredibly selfish, unpleasant man.
Jerkass Has a Point:
As meandering and unprovoked as a lot of his complaining is, now and then he does make some good or relevant points. Awful as he is for ruining Fiona's wedding, his public character assassination of Sean does prove to Fiona that Sean hasn't changed for her and is a remorseless addict.
When Monica returns in season 2, even he realizes it's not going to last; he nonetheless convinces Fiona to let the kids indulge in her being there because he knows that with him and Monica as parents, they need all the happy memories they can get.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: …and despite (very occasional) Pet the Dog moments, he continues to find new lows to sink too.
Joker Immunity: More than a few doctors have expressed shock at the fact that he isn't dead yet, and Fiona sardonically remarks that he'll outlive everyone.
Karma Houdini: Played With. He rarely suffers much in the way of repercussions for his constant bastardry, apart from being disowned by most of his family and burning his bridges with nearly everyone else he knows. However, his life is a complete mess and it's clear people can't kick him any lower because he's already done it himself.
Kavorka Man: For someone so disheveled from decades of indulging in bad habits, he gets a lot of action.
Kick the Dog: A lot. Just when you think he does something bad, he does something even worse that is borderline sociopathic.
Laser-Guided Karma: After a lifetime of drinking, Frank is hit by early onset dementia from drinking too much.
A Lighter Shade of Grey: He's an awful father, but Lip gives the feint praise that Frank's "the good parent" compared to Monica. Justified assessment as Monica frequently abandons her children, and when she was present she traumatized them with manic bipolar episodes. At least Frank never outright abandons his kids.
When he feels like it, Frank pays more attention to the younger Gallaghers, especially Liam and later Franny, than they're used to getting elsewhere. He's also weirdly good at getting babies to sleep… then we find out he gives them valium.
Debbie: I don't think you're supposed to give valium to babies.
Frank: You turned out fine.
The Load: All the time, but when he does help, it's interesting to say the least.
Made of Iron: Has overdosed multiple times, is a frequent guest and legend at the hospital, was given Last Rites three times, spends most of Season 4 dying, and is still kicking until the series finale.
Manipulative Bastard: He doesn't always get his way (and for good reason), but he can do some pretty impressive manipulation when push comes to shove.
The Millstone: It's a lot easier for the Gallagher children when Frank's not around to spend much-needed funds or generally just be a Spanner in the Works. Though there are some (rare) aversions where he finds some way to contribute.
Momma's Boy: Zig-zagged. Though he constantly tries to get on his abusive mother's good side, he's also clearly damaged from how she raised him and explodes at her for her how she treated him… only to go back to the same behavior the next day.
Narcissist: See It's All About Me above.
Near-Death Experience: Spends most of Season 4 literally dying.
Never My Fault: Whenever things go wrong for him, he invariably finds ways to put the blame on everyone except himself.
Non-Action Guy: Frank gets his ass kicked by everybody. Usually…
Pet the Dog: He has his moments. He'll also occasionally use his schemes to benefit his children – always as a side effect to his own selfish desires, but it still counts in some ways.
Notably, when catching Ian and Mickey having sex, he passes no judgment on them despite their fear at what he might do with the information.
One of his biggest moments comes at the penultimate episode of season three where he takes responsibility for a heist he and Carl carried out, saving Carl from going to juvie. This shocks Lip so much that he comments, "Hell just froze over."
When talking to Peggy alone, he genuinely compliments his children, showing that even though he's manipulative, narcissistic, and unreliable, he still notices their achievements and is proud of them.
His relationship with Emily is this, especially when a doped-up Frank thinks she's Fiona and apologizes for being such a horrible parent. When she dies, he's crushed.
He displays shockingly unusual selflessness and love when it comes to Bianca, and genuinely goes out of his way to help her. Contrast his coldly ratting out Chuckie to get back at Sammi for shooting him and his call to her family to let them know where she is, because he sincerely wants her to get help so that he has more time to spend with her.
In Season 6, he (reluctantly) abandons his newfound hippie paradise and risks being killed by drug dealers he ripped off to drive a heavily pregnant Debbie to the hospital.
In Season 7, he helps gets Liam into a nice private school for free, earning him a hug from his youngest child. He still has a paternal instinct, even if it's just barely there.
In Season 11 after sending Franny to the wrong school, he takes her with him on a day in his life. The two bond and Franny follows his advice, while Frank decides to get her name tattooed onto him.
Playing Possum: Incredibly good at pretending to be asleep to avoid confrontation.
The Sociopath: Frank's an unrepentant, narcissistic Jerkass with a huge sense of entitlement, natural avoidance of personal responsibility for his actions and a semi-complete Lack of Empathy. Notably, like many real cases, he's capable of caring for people, but always in a provisional sense, and will not hesitate to abandon or turn on them if he feels he's been slighted or that his own well-being is more important.
The Stoner: After his liver troubles in Season 4 leave him unable to drink more than the bare minimum, he turns to other drugs, the main one being pot.
Third Line, Some Waiting: Frank's role in any given episode tends to inevitably be this. While the rest of the family is coping with massive crises and personal dilemmas involving relationships, careers, financial difficulties, and even life and death that can span entire seasons, Frank is usually off on some unrelated comedic sub-plot where he's pursuing or dealing with the consequences of his latest bizarre scheme, and generally has no idea what is currently happening in his children's lives. This also works the other way, where his children usually have no idea what he's up to; in the Season 5 finale, when his new love Bianca commits suicide rather than succumb to cancer, he's genuinely heartbroken and numb while Lip and Ian just laugh at him, mocking his bizarre behavior.
Tough Love: His speech defending bullying is a magnificent mixture of this and Crosses the Line Twice as he insists that kids should be bullied to understand how harsh the world is and to avoid people like Carl. He insists that the bullied will emerge better while the bullies all end up losers.
Tragic Villain: While some of the things that happened in his life were his own fault, he suffered terrible abuse from his mother and father, and is at least a better parent compared to them. Had his childhood been different, there is no doubt Frank may have become a better parent and person in general.
Trauma Conga Line: After weaseling his way out of plenty of bad situations, he develops health problems at the end of Season 3 and spends all of Season 4 dying (though he gets better by the end). As much of an asshole as he is, seeing a chalk-pale Frank too weak to even stand and begging Sammi to not put him in the depressing hospice care is pretty rough.
The Un-Favourite: With the exceptions of Debbie, Carl and Sammi, none of his children have the slightest respect or affection for him, and by Season 5, even they all had their pedestals broken. When he desperately needs a liver in Season 4, Carl and Sammi are the only ones who care about his impending death and try to help out, with everyone else content to let him die. Liam barely even realizes that Frank exists. When he was in a coma in between Seasons 6 and 7, nobody bothered to search for him, and when Frank asks why, Carl outright tells him that everyone was hoping that he was dead. Not only that, but he's also this among his own parents as well.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: Even though he's the main character, he's the number one source of everyone else's problems and one of the most despicable characters on the show, a fact that is regularly played both for laughs and for drama.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: It's frequently implied that Frank was much smarter, kinder, and sane back when he was a little kid, with drugs, a horrible childhood, and his own repressed vices being what killed that part of him.
Useless Protagonist: Most of the time, Frank can't even be bothered to pitch in like the rest for anything in the house, even actively stealing from it when no one's looking.
You Called Me "X"; It Must Be Serious: Usually, when his children start calling him "Frank", it's usually the point where they stop respecting him as a father.