Age-Gap Romance: Both Kash and Ned are considerably older than him.
All Gays are Promiscuous:
In season 5, he cheats on Mickey, though this is justified as he is in a manic state.
He cheats on his boyfriend Trevor the second he sees Mickey again.
He and Mick take part in an orgy.
Batter Up!: Although Fiona, Lip, and Carl have used the infamous Gallagher baseball bat on occasions, it seems to be Ian’s preferred weapon of choice when protecting himself and his siblings against attackers… and Frank.
Beware the Nice Ones: Arguably the most easygoing and approachable of the Gallagher clan, but can be downright scary when he's pissed off enough.
Big Brother Instinct: He's fairly protective of Debbie and Carl.
Break the Cutie: In Season 3, Ian is heartbroken when Mickey gets Svetlana pregnant and agrees to marry her, despite clearly not wanting to. Devastated, Ian runs away at the end of the season.
It’s made even worse in Seasons 4 and 5, when Ian is revealed to have bipolar disorder, deepening his emotional and mental struggles.
But Not Too Gay: Played straight until around Season 3, since for the first two seasons because his actor was not yet 18, and therefore could not perform any explicit sex scenes.
Caught with Your Pants Down: The opening sequence features Ian jerking off with a magazine in the bathroom before being abruptly interrupted by Kev who came in to look for something.
Closet Key: For Mickey Milkovich. He helped Mickey realize he is gay and come to terms with his sexuality.
Fiery Redhead: He’s a redheaded boy who is impulsive, brash, and surprisingly resourceful.
Generation Xerox: He develops Bipolar Disorder in Season 4, just like his mother.
Happily Married: With Mickey, as of the season 10 finale. They hit a bit of a rough patch after the honeymoon period is over and they are affected by the pandemic, but they get over it and are ultimately stable and very happy together.
The Idealist: Especially when compared with Lip. His whole military aspirations are filled with some pretty rosy expectations of life in the armed forces.
Informed Ability: Subverted. Ian supposedly knows how to kill people in a hundred different ways, is a good marksman and trains karate, but even armed with a tire iron, Mickey managed to get the upper hand of him easily and most of Ian's problems have been solved by either diplomacy or sex, so there's not much support for his alleged skills. However, Ian beats the living crap out of his brother, proving he does have some fighting abilities but just chooses not to. After Frank headbutts him, Lip tells him to fight back, but Ian says he won't because if he does, he will kill him. AND in Season 3 he knocked down Mickey with TWO fingers!
Love Martyr: Being in love with Mickey Milkovich is no picnic. Averted in Season 7, when he decides to break up with Mickey for good and focus on his job as an EMT and date someone less complicated.
The Medic: As of Season 6, he's become a paramedic.
Mood-Swinger: It's unclear whether this is due to drugs, bipolar disorder or both; but Ian alternates between periods of almost manic enthusiasm and deep depression. Season 4 confirms this: he has bipolar disorder, just like Monica.
Morality Pet: He's this to Mickey from Seasons 1-5, before Mickey puts most of his criminal enterprise to bed.
Mr. Fanservice: Gives lap dances for a living no less!
Nice Guy: Downplayed, due to his bipolar disorder, but he is easily the most friendly and approachable of the Gallagher clan. Note how he has the largest friend circle outside of his family.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: While a paramedic, he thinks he can connect with a woman having a mental breakdown well enough to where he can loosen her restraints against protocol… Only for her to immediately jump out of the back of the van and get hit by a car (non-fatally).
No Bisexuals: Seems to be a believer in this; he assumes Jimmy's dad is gay and doesn't seem convinced when he claims that he just Really Gets Around, and also maintains that Mickey's gay and that he only sleeps with women so he can lie to himself.note  Season 7 has him breaking up with Caleb over him being bisexual.note  He also doesn't believe in any level of sexual fluidity, as seen when Debbie (formerly boy crazy) starts identifying as a lesbian, he flatly tells her that she isn't gay, despite her spending the last few seasons of the show exclusively dating and being in relationships with women.
No Medication for Me:
He initially refuses to acknowledge his bipolar diagnosis and take his medication, but finally realizes it's necessary for him after some time, especially when he sees how Monica's been doing without treatment.
He stops taking his meds in season 8, leading to a manic episode and the Gay Jesus movement, ultimatley resulting in a prison sentence.
Note to Self: Season 7 shows that he recorded a message to himself telling him to go home and take a break if his bipolar disorder is causing issues for him at work.
Offscreen Moment of Awesome: We don't get to see any part of his life in the Army, including him trying to steal a helicopter.
Out of Focus: Goes in and out of this over the course of the show, most notably in Season 2 and the beginning of Season 4.
Pretty Boy: Especially when compared with the rougher looking (though still attractive) relatives. Justified, as his real dad is much finer featured than Frank.
Put on a Bus: Literally, at the end of Season 3 when he steals Lip's identity to join the Army, though he returns a few episodes into Season 4. Due to the actor’s decision to leave the show, Ian is sentenced to two years in prison after blowing up a van, and leaves halfway through Season 9, though he has a cameo in the season finale to say goodbye to Fiona.
The Bus Came Back: Returned for seasons 10-11.
Sleeping with the Boss: He had a relationship with his boss Kash.
Straight Gay: While he can play the gay stripper/club kid, in everyday life he is basically an average guy.
Took a Level in Badass: From Season 2 onwards, when he started to get serious about his intentions to join the army.
Took a Level in Jerkass:
The first half of Season 6 sees his attitude worsen as he constantly butts heads with Fiona and even eventually Lip, a side effect of his refusal to medicate. He gets better, though.
Toward the end of season eight when he stops taking his medication and his fame as "Gay Jesus" goes to his head.
Tragic Dropout: Of the army. While Ian is not as intelligent as Lip or Fiona, he goes seriously off the rails once he is discharged.
Transparent Closet: While he didn't go flaunting it early on (because in his neighborhood, homophobia is quite common apparently), by Season 4, it's pretty obvious to everyone in the Gallagher house that he and Mickey were in some sort of relationship.
The Un-Favourite: To Frank, for a multitude of reasons. For one thing, he looks like Monica, who Frank has had a troubled relationship with. There's also the fact that he isn't actually Frank's son. And most damningly, he is both A) not a Hero-Worshipper of Frank like Debbie and Carl were in the earlier seasons and B) still young enough to be vulnerable to Frank's crap. Notably, he's the only kid that Frank physically abuses.
Who's Your Daddy?: In Season 1, he finds out that Frank isn't actually his biological father. In fact, he's the result of an affair between Monica and one of Frank's brothers.