Berserk Button: Don't call him stupid.
Beta Couple: Him and Vee.
The Big Guy: He's a very tall, physically imposing guy - but is so sweet that you hardly notice.
Bigger Is Better in Bed: Veronica seems to think so.
Book Dumb: He is very street smart and has displayed a deep understanding of life, but can barely read due to being dyslexic and didn't do well in school.
Bumbling Dad: Averted; while he isn't the brightest, he takes to parenthood more easily than Vee does and she even admits to feeling disappointed that he isn't one of these because it makes her feel even more guilty about being Maternally Challenged.
Catchphrase: "Fucking Gallaghers!"
Early-Installment Weirdness: In the first few episodes, he tolerated the Gallaghers at best. Eventually, he became one of their closest friends. He's also seen creeping on Mandy and mentions a father in prison, which is seemingly Retconned.
Faux Yay: After Svetlana takes over the Alibi, he's desperate enough for work that he not only dances at Ian's old club the White Tail, but also lets men give him handjobs for money.
Foster Kid: He was in a few foster homes when he was younger, which encourages him to foster Ethel and her baby son.
Gentle Giant: Kevin is a tall and imposing barkeeper, but he's actually one of the nicest people in the show. After all, he basically subsidizes the Gallaghers' living expenses by paying for TV and the phone and they also borrow his appliances.
Girl-on-Girl is Hot: When he finds out that Vee has been cheating on him with Svetlana, he's incredibly torn between feeling angry and aroused.
Happily Married: To Veronica, even if their marriage is "technically" not legal because of an earlier marriage that was never annulled. However, come Season 5, they aren't so happily married. By season's end, they're working on it.
House Husband: V mostly takes over bar duties during Season 5 while he tends to the children. Exaggerated when he becomes so fixated on the home that all he can talk about is his children.
Innocent Fanservice Guy: He oftentimes walks around the house completely naked, though it's less innocent and more "too lazy to put on clothes".
It's All My Fault: A brief arc in Season 6 has him racked with guilt for being responsible for his neighbor Yanis' paralysis when Kev cut the brakes instead of the throttle on Yanis' bike so that Yanis would stop revving it loudly to annoy the new lesbian neighbors.
Mistaken for Cheating: V thinks he's cheating when he's really just learning how to read.
Nice Guy: One of the most good-hearted people on the show.
Papa Wolf: Gets extremely protective of his children to the point where he accidentally puts them at risk when he fails to match gun ownership with gun safety.
He was also pretty protective of Debbie in the early seasons. Such as not letting her in the Alibi after six, and when he first met Matty, he was not pleased to learn how old he was.
Polyamory: He is part of a throuple with Vee and Svetlana in seasons 6-7.
Tangled Family Tree: When they're having trouble conceiving and are unable to afford in vitro fertilization, Vee and Kev convince Vee's mother to conceive the baby with Kevin. The resulting child would have been both Vee's adopted child and half-sibling, and Carol's own child and grandchild as well.
True Companions: Veronica, Kevin, and the Gallaghers (well, the kids). He even says they're the closest thing he has to a family.