Academic Athlete: She qualifies even if the show is not set in a school. She's probably the most academically inclined character with a vast knowledge of science, and also a Passionate Sports Girl who excels at karate.
Action Girl: Much more so in earlier episodes, though it still shows through every now and then. It's often shown that she's very strong, occasionally so much that she easily defeats SpongeBob, as tough as he is to damage, in Kung-Fu battles.
Americans Are Cowboys: The only character explicitly stated to come from the United States, and she's a Texas cowpoke through and through.
Animals Not to Scale: She's rather small for a squirrel. In Sponge Out of Water, she's smaller than a human's foot.
Ax-Crazy: If her hibernation is interrupted, she turns into a rabid, feral beast.
Badass Bookworm: She is extremely intelligent and often shown to be extraordinarily strong. Also likes life-threatening stunts.
Bare-Fisted Monk: She's a master of Karate, and it's part of how she and SpongeBob initially bonded.
Bare Midriffs Are Feminine: She's one of the main female characters, and when she's not wearing her suit filled with oxygen, she wears a purple bikini top and green panties with a purple skirt, leaving her midsection exposed.
Berserk Button: Never ever insult anything/anyone from Texas, or even the state itself. You will regret it, as SpongeBob and Patrick faced the serious consequences.
Sandy: Don't you dare take the name of Texas in vain!
She's also easily set off by people spreading false information about science or promoting psuedosciences like astrology as real science.
Big Sister Instinct: She's frequently portrayed as immediately defending SpongeBob from terror.
Big, Thin, Short Trio: The Thin to Patrick's Big and SpongeBob's Short.
Brainy Brunette: Has brown fur and is often depicted as extremely intelligent, especially in episodes relating to her inventions. Next to Karen and occasionally Plankton, she is one of the smartest members of the main cast.
Break the Haughty: Suffers it in "Sandy, SpongeBob, and the Worm". She goes to take out the Alaskan Bullworm for the sake of the town, and adamantly refuses to listen to SpongeBob's warnings about how big and monstrous the thing is, convinced she's "too Texas-tough" and can easily handle the worm. In the end, she comes across the worm in a cave and apparently beats it... only to discover that what she fought was actually the worm's tongue, and the Bikini Bottomites were not exaggerating over how big and monstrous it is; all of her bravado fades in an instant.
Broken Ace: She tends to be competent and highly skilled at everything she does. However, she suffers a light case of this in some episodes, due to her very competitive attitude. She takes the idea of not being the best at something rather badly.
Bully Hunter: Though she may sometimes get exasperated by them, she'll always stand up for SpongeBob and Patrick.
In "Hot Crossed Nuts", Mr Krabs adds her barbeque nuts to the menu, and coldly dismisses SpongeBob and the Krabby Patties. Upon seeing SpongeBob's heartbroken reaction, and Mr Krabs' callous indifference, she retaliates by resigning and taking her recipe off the menu at the worst possible time.
In "Patrick! The Game", Squidward has been mocking Patrick's attempts at making his own game. When he tries to do so at the Game Night, Sandy shuts him up and coerces him into joining in whenever he doesn’t make an effort.
Bullying a Dragon: Combined with Break the Haughty. Despite the Bikini Bottomites and SpongeBob's constant warnings about how big and monstrous the Alaskan Bull Worm was, Sandy refuses to take them seriously. This bites her in the butt when she finds out that the "worm" she was fighting was actually its tongue. Sandy then realized that she was seriously outclassed and runs for her life.
Characterization Marches On: While alluded to in several early episodes (such as "Sandy's Rocket", where she has a rocket she presumably built herself), her scientific nature was largely a side trait of hers during the pre-first-movie era, with her largely being shown as The Ace in many areas rather than specializing specifically in science. It wasn't until Season 4 that her inventor personality was established, and in many newer episodes, her scientific prowess is a defining trait of hers.
Chaste Toons: "Sandy's Nutty Nieces" reveals she has three nieces.
Competition Freak: Sandy is used to being the best at multiple talents and sports, so gets rather aggressive with when challenged.
Cool Big Sis: Her relationship with SpongeBob can be rather brother-sisterly in that the former looks up to her and they get into conflicts often but always come out clean.
Cute Bruiser: She is clearly one of Bikini Bottom's strongest residents, if not the strongest. She occasionally challenges massive, heavily muscled beachgoers to weightlifting challenges, and is one of the few characters who can rival Larry in raw power.
A Day in the Limelight: Saving Bikini Bottom: The Sandy Cheeks Movie puts her in the main protagonist role after a long time being Demoted to Extra.
Ditzy Genius: Depending on the Writer. While generally smart and rational, she is usually given several notable character flaws to balance out her intelligence (particularly in episodes where she's the main focus), such as being short-tempered, impulsive, arrogant, and having little common sense when it comes to certain inventions. Is there really that much use for a helmet that lets the user talk to nuts?
Early Installment Character-Design Difference: In the first season, her tail wasn't outside her suit, and the patch on her suit was three black dots instead of her signature acorn.
Enraged by Idiocy: Not to the extent of Squidward, but she frequently expresses her annoyance towards people's stupidity, particularly when it regards Patrick on occasions like in "I Had an Accident" for instance.
Sandy: (to Patrick) Don't you have to go be stupid somewhere else?
Establishing Character Moment: The first time Sandy is seen on-screen, she's shown fighting a giant clam, ultimately cementing her strength and masculinity.
Everything Is Big in Texas: Even though she's minuscule compared to the Texas landscape, her personality more than matches the size of her home state.
Fish Out of Water: Played straight, though she's actually a squirrel IN water. Her troubles fitting in with an underwater society aren't as apparent in the later episodes, though.
Flanderization: Originally portrayed as The Ace in various activities, post-movie episodes have increasingly focused on her being a scientist, pretty much shunning anything else she was passionate about.
Flawless Token: Downplayed. Sandy's the only main character to be a land critter and she happens to be the smartest and most ambitious of them all, The Ace in various fields, and often the least prone to holding the Idiot Ball. Even when compared to Squidward and Plankton, the latter two are defined by their constant failures, which is a stark contrast to Sandy's many achievements over the course of the series. Sandy still has her character flaws, like a competitive streak and being a Fish Out of Water, but they're usually toned down when compared to the other main character's quirks.
Foil: She serves as this to two main characters:
SpongeBob: While both of them are energetic and eccentric critters who like karate, their personalities differ in that:
SpongeBob is a naïve and kooky Ditz who's childish, pestering, wimpy, cowardly, and generally ignorant in all but a few topic areas.
Sandy is a mature, tough, bold, and intelligent individual who more often than not plays the Only Sane Woman role.
Squidward: Both are the two characters who have the most common sense in a Crapsaccharine World like Bikini Bottom, are considered by SpongeBob as his best friend, and are often annoyed by his childish antics but have shown a degree of care for him. What differs them is that:
Squidward is grumpy, dislikes most people, is a Dreadful Musician (it usually), and has passionately denied being SpongeBob's friend multiple times.
Sandy is cheerful, is willing to befriend most citizens, is skilled in karate and scientific invention, and genuinely enjoys SpongeBob's company.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: The Choleric (shares this with Mr. Krabs). She's task-oriented and likes a challenge.
The Friendly Texan: A proud Texan and one of the nicest characters in the series. However, she can get pretty scary when she's angry, and disrespecting her home state is a surefire way to set her off (again, proud Texan).
Gadgeteer Genius: She built tons of nifty gadgets.
Genius Bruiser: She's athletic, tough, and loves karate, while also being an extremely smart scientist.
Genki Girl: She can be excitable and cheerful when she wants to have a good time.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Usually level-headed, but being a Hot-Blooded Texan, she's rarely subtle when her temper flares.
Hypocrite: In "Abrasive Side", Sandy tells SpongeBob he shouldn't be rude to people, despite taking advantage of him earlier on.
I Am Not Weasel: She's been mistaken for a weasel by an amnesiac SpongeBob, as well as Patrick, in "Whatever Happened to SpongeBob?". She also gets mistaken for a chipmunk, a ferret, and even a goat in "Someone's In the Kitchen With Sandy".
Idiot Ball:
Holds this in "Prehibernation Week", where she takes SpongeBob along with her to perform extreme stunts with little regard to his deteriorating health. This doubles as Jerkass Ball.
She invokes this on herself in "Squirrel Jokes" in retaliation against SpongeBob's bigoted humor about her species, showing him how toxic it would be to have a friend who's Too Dumb to Live.
In "Kenny the Cat", she apparently can't tell the difference between cats and dogs, unsure of which one is a squirrel's sworn enemy. Again, doubles as Jerkass Ball since she exposes Kenny the Cat and sends him back to the surface unprovoked.
Implied Love Interest: Her close friendship with SpongeBob, as well as several Ship Tease between the two of them can make her this, which is more prevalent in Season 1, though some subtle hints can be shown in later seasons as well.
Inexplicably Tailless: In Season 1, her tail was hidden while wearing her suit, but nowadays, her tail is exposed through her suit.
Invisibility: She can turn invisible as Miss Appear in "Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy V".
Jerkass Ball: In spite of her overall kindness, she can be quite an Insufferable Genius and egotistical jerk at times, and occasionally forces the others to do excruciating activities with her when it dangerously affects their health.
In "Prehibernation Week", she forces SpongeBob along with her in her extreme sports activities, which clearly have an adverse affect on his health, not that Sandy seems to notice or care.
In "SpongeBob, You're Fired", she feeds various freeloaders (including Patrick) toxic waste for no reason beyond curiosity.
In "Kenny the Cat", she exposes the eponymous character as a fraud in front of his fans and forcefully kicks him to the top of the ocean's surface despite him having done nothing to provoke her. Her only motivation seems to be Animal Jingoism, and it’s implied that she forgot that said jingoism usually focuses on dogs.
Just Friends: In spite of the Ship Tease, her relationship with SpongeBob seems to be platonic.
Lack of Empathy: "Prehibernation Week" stands out for having this. She and SpongeBob partake on a series of extreme sports, but she genuinely thinks SpongeBob is having as much fun as she is. But when he bails and she thinks he’s gone missing, she forces the whole town to help her look for him. The citizens get their faces burned off, attacked by poison sea urchins and leeches. Sandy’s response to these misfortunes? The townsfolk aren’t trying and need to triple their efforts.
Lady And A Scholar: She is one of the friendliest characters on the show and also a genius. It helps that she's one of the few characters on the show that didn't Take a Level in Dumbass or Jerkass.
Lethally Stupid: In "Prehibernation Week", and only that episode. She forces SpongeBob to take part in a series of life-threatening sports and seems oblivious to his despair even as he screams and cries. After SpongeBob decides to hide from her, she rallies the entire city to search for him, ordering them to repeatedly venture into dangerous places and refusing to let any of them sleep.
Lightning Bruiser: She's very strong (as mentioned above in Cute Bruiser), tough (goes through very hard physical training, such as looking for a SINGLE STRAND OF HAY in a HUGE PILE OF METAL NEEDLES without getting hurt or tiring out) and is also very agile (especially considering she is wearing a heavy suit and is reasonably fast even while under water pressure).
Like Brother and Sister: While there has been some romantic connotations in their friendship, she and SpongeBob have a brother-sister relationship, enjoying each other's company and performing karate together, albeit not without having their squabbles.
Made of Iron: Thanks to Super-Strength, Sandy has survived many fatal accidents and near-death experiences that SpongeBob wouldn't.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy:
Masculine Girl to SpongeBob's Feminine Boy. Sandy is characteristically tough in that she has survived the most fatal obstacles, practices extreme sports, fought a giant clam by which she was nearly eaten, and is proficient in hardware; SpongeBob is a wimpy coward who's In Touch with His Feminine Side, unable to stand up for himself, sports a very girly appearance, and has cross-dressed on a few occasions.
She is also the Masculine Girl to Squidward's Feminine Boy, as he prefers playing musical instruments, making arts such as paintings, and interpretive dancing.
Miles Gloriosus: In the comic story "Scaredy Snail", she and SpongeBob hear strange roaring noises coming from a trench. She immediately wants to investigate, mocking SpongeBob for being afraid. It turns out that she was scared out of her wits the whole time, banking on SpongeBob to get cold feet so she wouldn’t have to go into the trench. After this tearful confession, it seems there was no monster after all: it was just Patrick's echoing belches. But then an actual monster appears right behind him. Sandy, who came across as wanting to see such a creature, runs for her life.
"Miss X" Pun: The superheroine Miss Appear has the ability to go invisible, or disappear.
Ms. Vice Girl: She is a scientific genius, physically robust to superhuman levels and thoroughly optimistic and friendly on top of that. However, perhaps because of her many strengths and talents, she often displays an ego problem, which can lead her to be very aggressive and competitive when someone challenges her.
Muscles Are Meaningless: Played With in that the art style doesn't depict her as being muscular, but a few close-ups and occasional flexes do indeed show her with muscles, even being able to grow them by force (most notably in "Karate Island", but also in "MuscleBob BuffPants", "Christmas Who?", and "Whelk Attack").
Nice Girl: Sandy's a happy and friendly squirrel who cares a lot about her friends and is one of the few characters not to take a level in Jerkass in later seasons.
Nice, Mean, and In-Between: A Downplayed example along with SpongeBob and Patrick as they're all generally nice people, but Sandy is the the mean one to SpongeBob's nice and Patrick's in-between; having a bigger berserk button when she gets annoyed by the latter two's antics. Later seasons have Sandy switch places with Patrick with the latter taking a level in jerkass.
Ninja Pirate Zombie Robot: A sea-dwelling squirrel that dresses like an astronaut to cope with the environment, Sandy's love of science and karate is surpassed only by her love of her home state of Texas.
Noble Bigot: In "Pressure", she repeatedly bragged that land creatures are better than sea creatures, with SpongeBob, Patrick, Squidward, and Mr. Krabs thinking the opposite. However, after their attempts at proving it put both sides in mortal danger, they grow out of it.
Not So Above It All: Sometimes, her sciencey-mind can make her do some things that push her into Mad Scientist territory.
Ocular Gushers: In "Texas", her longing for her eponymous hometown causes her to cry an abundance of tears in her helmet, so much to the point where there's a flusher installed in it to drain them.
Odd Friendship:
Her friendship with SpongeBob could qualify, as while both of them like karate, Sandy is far more intelligent and mature than the ditzy, goofball sponge, thus their relationship seems to be more brotherly-sister than genuine.
Same goes for her friendship with Patrick, although they rarely interact one-on-one and Patrick usually only goes to her house as SpongeBob's tagalong. Despite some disagreements regarding their vast difference in intellect, they seem to get along well enough.
Only Known by Their Nickname: The only times she was referred to by her full first name (Sandra) were in "Patrick SmartPants", "Atlantis SquarePantis", and "Two Thumbs Down".
Only Sane by Comparison: Not as sane as Squidward, and still quirky in her own right, but she's still fairly level-headed. Not so much before hibernation, though, as apparently the first stage of hibernation involves losing your mind.
Parody Sue: A few episodes, especially in the 2nd season, seem to make light of her somewhat lengthy amount of talents and positive aspects, it also usually being these points she was portrayed in a more flawed light.
Passionate Sports Girl: To a particularly extreme level. Adding to that her occasional Competition Freak bouts, working out with Sandy can border out and out life threatening.
Pint-Sized Powerhouse: While she's rather short in height and depicted as slim and noodle-limbed by the art style, she has performed the most badass of defeats for a squirrel in an astronaut suit.
Platonic Life-Partners: She's close friends with SpongeBob, and while there have been some definitive Ship Tease moments between the pair, their dynamic hasn't shown any explicit romance.
Punny Name: Her name is a reference to the concept of getting beach sand stuck to one's butt. She's also a squirrel, and some squirrel species are known for having cheek pouches.
Rodent Overbite: She's a squirrel and has prominent buck teeth that stick out even when her mouth is closed.
Retcon: In Season 2, it was established that she hibernated. In real life, tree squirrels don't do this. Later seasons show her outside in the snow.
Seven Deadly Sins: Embodies pride. Sandy is immensely proud of her Texan heritage, and often feels as though she's more capable to handle a task than anybody else, regardless of the danger.
Ship Tease:
Usually with SpongeBob, shown by how well they interact with one another, and some reactions to each others comments. One Flashback from "Truth or Square" even had them seemingly getting married, only for it to be revealed as a play after an Almost Kiss. Carolyn Lawrence, Sandy's voice actress, has admitted she believed that both characters have romantic interest in one another.
She also has some ship tease with Larry in "Ripped Pants", overlapping with her relationship with SpongeBob and seeming a bit like a Love Triangle on her part. The latter is greatly affected by Sandy choosing to interact with Larry over him (though SpongeBob brought this betrayal on himself as he went too far and faked a near-death experience just to make another joke about his pants).
Small Name, Big Ego: Albeit not as consistently as Squidward, she can overestimate her own abilities. Here are some examples:
In "Pressure", she repeatedly stated that land creatures are better than sea creatures and went so far as to almost drown herself in an attempt to prove it.
In "Sandy, SpongeBob, and the Worm", she was firmly convinced that, being "Texas tough", she could easily handle the Alaskan Bullworm, repeatedly dismissing and even mocking SpongeBob's warnings. When she finally reaches it and finds out that the Alaskan Bullworm is indeed as big and dangerous as everyone said, she runs in fear, and only admits she was wrong after SpongeBob nagged her into doing so.
The Smart Girl: Mostly in the later seasons, which play into her scientist characterization.
The Smurfette Principle: While she's not the only female character in the show overall, she is often the only female accompanying SpongeBob and the gang whenever they go on an adventure.
Somewhere, a Mammalogist Is Crying: Sandy tends to be a bit inaccurate to real squirrels. The show establishes her species as a “Texas land squirrel”, which isn’t a real species (though underwater scientists may have their own names for species). She’s largely a generic interpretation of a tree squirrel, but a few episodes confirm that she hibernates like a ground squirrel (while others contradict this), and yet she takes offense to being called a “chipmunk”. She’s also shown to be much smaller than most tree squirrels in the second movie, and her spin-off movie portrays her as a flying squirrel species despite her not resembling one at all.
Southern-Fried Genius: She's a genius from Texas, and proud of it!
Stronger Than They Look: From a first glance, Sandy looks no stronger than SpongeBob (who, needless to say, is a weakling), however, when she's faced with fatal near-death experiences, she absolutely aces it when it comes to overpowering her obstacles.
Super-Strength: Pretty obvious, actually. Especially when you see her pull a boat underwater by the chain in "Sandy, SpongeBob, and the Worm".
Talks Like a Simile: She has a pronounced habit of describing things with folksy comparisons. This is occasionally parodied in that she'll sometimes use ones she herself doesn't understand.
"SpongeBob's acting jumpier than a rattlesnake in a pickle barrel. *beat* Huh?
Team Mom: Unlike most other Only Sane Man characters on the show, who are usually Jerkasses, Sandy has shown herself able to deliver logic and reason to SpongeBob and Patrick constructively and in a way that doesn't come off as abrasive.
Terrestrial Sea Life: Inverted; she's a land squirrel living among sea creatures.
Tertiary Sexual Characteristics: She wears a flower on her diving helmet so it's more readily apparent she's a girl. She's got eyelashes too, but so does SpongeBob.
Token Good Teammate: One of the only characters who hasn't been turned into either a Jerkass or a moron. Her occasional ego and temperament can provoke some unfortunate situations in the show (eg. "Pressure"), that said, she is arguably the one recurring character that hasn't had her flaws Flanderized over her redeeming aspects.
Token Non-Human: Or in this case, token non-fish. She's the only land creature in a show about aquatic sea creatures.
Tomboy: Sandy's a muscular squirrel girl with a passion for sports and science.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The karate chopping techno whiz Tomboy to Pearl's Girly Bratty Teenage Daughter.
Tomboyish Voice: Downplayed, it's more Southern than tomboyish.
Tomboy with a Girly Streak: Sandy may always be up for tough fun or a science experiment, but she's not quite The Lad-ette. She regularly wears a pink decorative flower on her helmet and nothing but her bikini in her treedome, openly cries over her isolation from her hometown, and perhaps most prominently, is not above venturing into typical Gossipy Hens nighttime behavior with Karen and Mrs. Puff (who are apparently gal pals with each other) in "Girls' Night Out".
Too Clever by Half: Every now and then she goes into being so smart that it puts her at a disadvantage.
Took a Level in Jerkass: A downplayed relative case. Sandy became much more prideful and hot headed in Season Two. Unlike with some other mainstays however, this was less an exercise in flanderization and more just to give Sandy some comical foibles like everyone else, being mostly just The Ace in her earlier episodes. She never became unrepentantly nasty about it and remained a nice person overall.
Toon Transformation: She was a live-action squirrel when she lived in Texas, but she became animated like the rest of the residents of Bikini Bottom when she moved there.
Trademark Favorite Food: She likes eating nuts and anything nut-related. Give or take, she's a squirrel.
Unaffected by Spice: She downs a bottle of Volcano Sauce in "Karate Choppers" like it's nothing.
Unfortunate Names: As stated above, her name is a reference to the idea of sand getting stuck to one's butt.
Vague Age: She's almost certainly an adult, but whether she's meant to be a younger adult like SpongeBob and Patrick or closer to, say, Squidward's age, is never clarified. Fans typically pegs her as the former.
Vocal Evolution: As the series goes on, Sandy's voice has gotten higher and her Texan accent much thicker. Since around Season 9B, her voice became a bit lower pitched due to her voice actress aging.
Walking Swimsuit Scene: Seen in a bikini whenever she's in the Treedome. Notably, the main character model sheet◊ features Sandy in both her bikini and her diving suit (all of the other characters only have one outfit on the sheet).
Well-Intentioned Extremist: In "Prehibernation Week", she jumps to the conclusion that something terrible has happened to SpongeBob after finding his pants caught on a coral. She quickly recruits everyone in Bikini Bottom to look for him, and they genuinely want to without any promise of a reward. As time goes by, however, Sandy makes everyone search in dangerous places and doesn’t take consideration for their safety or wellbeing. She then proceeds to destroy the city when everyone bails on her. All this happened because she was concerned for SpongeBob's safety.