Aloof Dark-Haired Girl: She's a snarky brunette who rarely emotes, except occasionally, mostly around Andy.
Ambiguously Bi: She expresses interest in going to a strip club in "Tom's Divorce" and finds Garry's painting of the topless centaur that resembles Leslie to be hot.
Arson, Murder, and Jaywalking: Her music taste really only consists of German death reggae, Halloween sound effects from the 1960s, and Bette Midler.
Aside Glance: Due to the format, all the characters do it from time to time, but the aside glance appears to be April's primary form of communication. Subverted earlier in the show, in that whenever April has been especially obnoxious to somebody else, she will sometimes give a resentful Aside Glance to show that she knows the camera has caught her obnoxiousness, and she isn't happy about it. Later in the show's run, when she becomes less cynical, less apathetic and less self-conscious, she gives fewer Aside Glances.
Aww Look They Really Do Love Each Other: A one-sided example with Ann. Despite some turbulence early in their relationship, Ann (for the most part) likes April and is eager for friendship, whereas April constantly insults, makes fun of, and belittles her. Despite this, April still occasionally turns to Ann for advice, and as her jerkass tendencies lessen it comes off as more of an in-joke. She admits that she does love Ann in "Ann and Chris" - although, in true April fashion, she mumbles it and begs Ann not to make her say it out loud.
Babies Ever After: After some resistance, she and Andy eventually have a son named Jack in the Distant Finale, with another on the way.
Beta Couple: With Andy after they become a couple. She is the youngest, most cynical, and apathetic of the main female characters and is ironically the first of them to get married.
Better with Non-Human Company: She shows a general disdain for people, but it turns out that despite her cynical apathy she's very fond of animals. She starts up a pet adoption to avoid having to fill in for Leslie at government meetings.
April: I think I may have found a project I'd actually enjoy doing. Helping these cats and dogs. They should be rewarded for not being people. I hate people.
Be Yourself: In Season 5 she gets put into the public spotlight more and more as a representative for the parks department. At first she imitates Leslie as a way to get through her presentations since Leslie has always been good at that sort of thing and it helps her deal with her nerves, but April realizes that Leslie's methods don't work for her and simply starts acting like herself. While this gets complaints for excessive rudeness, she is much more successful than she ever was imitating Leslie.
Breakout Character: Started off as mostly a Living Prop in the first season before the increased focus on her plotlines drove her to become the most popular female character of the series.
Brilliant, but Lazy: She is actually rather smart, but would prefer not to bother with things like responsibility and hard work.
April: I don't want to do things. I want to not do things.
The Bully: At her worst, she often insults and embarrasses other people for fun. With the arguable exception of Tom, she's easily the biggest one towards Jerry and, unlike Tom, she doesn't have any reason for doing so aside from amusing herself.
Cannot Spit It Out: Half the problems she and Andy had getting together during their Will They or Won't They? courtship were caused by her unwillingness to just tell him how she felt. She resorted to hints and subterfuge (such as attempting Operation: Jealousy) rather than telling him that she liked him. If she was angry with him she would get passive aggressive instead of telling him she was angry and why.
Character Development:
In the second season, she becomes progressively nicer and more open the more she hangs out with Andy. It culminates in "Galentine's Day", where, after getting fed up with her gay boyfriends being jerks, she asks, "God, why does everything we do have to be cloaked in, like, 15 layers of irony?"
Her character arc starts in earnest in Season 4 and continues into Season 5 as she realizes that she can't be a complete jerk to everyone and attempts earnestly to forge a career. Besides that, April becomes more outgoing and eccentric as the show goes on, most prominently after marrying Andy. Lampshaded in "Miss Ludgate-Dwyer Goes to Washington".
April: (to Leslie) When I started working for you, I was aimless and just thought everything was stupid and lame. You turned me into someone with goals and ambition. Which is the reason why I'm even thinking about what I really want.
Contrasting New Love Interest: She is this to Andy, representing a significant contrast to Ann. She is much more dour, but also much more on Andy’s…very specific wavelength. Ann was also a natural caregiver (being a nurse), which Andy took advantage of. April…not so much, which coincides nicely with Andy’s Character Development, as he becomes better able to take care of himself and become more independent, allowing them to have a more equal relationship and, ultimately, marriage.
Creepy Monotone: Her tone of voice barely ever wavers from a steady monotone, suiting her Emotionless Girl personality, as well as helping with her generally creepy aura.
The Cynic: Starts off as the most cynical character in the show. However she eventually grows to be more encouraging and optimistic occasionally towards those she cares about at least.
Dare to Be Badass: She encourages Andy to pursue his dreams.
Deadpan Snarker: Easily the best example on the show. April can be counted on to respond to things with dripping sarcasm.
Death Glare: Easily the best example on the show, too. When she can't be bothered to snark, she'll usually just glare.
Defrosting Ice Queen: April starts to open up in Season 2, mostly thanks to Andy's influence.
Dismotivation: She and Ron get along well.
Embarrassing Middle Name: Roberta.
Embarrassing Nick Name: Her parents call her "Zuzu".
Emotionless Girl: Getting her to express any emotion besides scathing sarcasm is quite rare.
Fag Hag: Until midway into Season 2, she constantly hangs out with her "gay boyfriend" and his boyfriend. She breaks up with him because it turns out that Derek and Ben are actually rather mean, despite initial impressions to the contrary.
April: Derek is gay but he's straight for me, but he's gay for Ben and Ben's really gay for Derek. And I hate Ben.
Fourth-Date Marriage: Married Andy after dating a month.
Friend to All Living Things: In sharp contrast with her general hatred towards humans, April loves animals, particularly her and Andy's pet dog Champion. Managing an animal adoption show while Leslie was busy elsewhere was the first time she didn't utterly hate government work, and many of her later story arcs also revolve around animals.
The Gadfly: More like gadhornet; Loves messing with people in various ways, such as tricking her doppelgänger into breaking into Dwayne Wade's house or putting question mark stickers on stop signs.
Growing Up Sucks: Firmly believes so, as demonstrated in "Jerry's Painting". Andy manages to convince her by the end that they can be responsible adults while still staying true to themselves.
Happily Married: To Andy. For a given definition of 'happy' in her case, anyway.
Hidden Heart of Gold: She may talk tough and keep up a snarky exterior, but most of April's Emotionless Girl persona is really just a front to avoid openly demonstrating her emotions around others. Dating Andy and learning to embrace her career cracks that façade more and more, and by Season 6 it's almost entirely gone.
Hipster: Of course, with her snarky attitude. Her favorite band is Neutral Milk Hotel, and aside from that, she only listens to German Death Reggae or Halloween sound effects records from the 1950s. (And Bette Midler, obviously.)
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: April's a pretty big jerk, she enjoys mocking Garry, openly dislikes Ann, has little respect for the rules, and claims to hate everyone and everything. However she does have a softer side, particularly towards Ron, Andy, and later Leslie. As the show goes on, the "jerk" aspect fades — though she's always pretty creepy and abrasive, and even then she only ever uses it to destroy anything she genuinely despises, instead of just everybody around her.
Large Ham: Whenever she acts in-show, like when she adopts her "Janet Snakehole" character.
The Matchmaker: Though not a very good one. April is the one who pairs up Tom and Ann, much to her regret as they annoy her later with their relationship problems. She also tries to set up Chris, still sad from breaking up with Garry's daughter Millicent, with Andy's Women's Studies professor. Said professor ends up sleeping with Ron instead.
Interestingly, her eventual career - working for a foundation that helps people discover their passions and sends them to work for relevant projects throughout the country - can be considered a form of matchmaking, albeit in a professional sense as opposed to a romantic one.
Morality Pet: Andy becomes one for her in Season 2. Notably, her time with him leads her to reject her two gay boyfriends due to being annoyed by how artificial their hipster ways were, plus their unpleasant attitude towards Andy.
Nightmare Fetishist: To an incredible degree. Examples include being happy at having fake blood splattered all over her, wanting to live in a house that used to house the insane, her childhood dream job being working as funeral prepper, and being more interested in the horrible and disgusting effects pregnancy would have on her body than actually having a child. Donna even calls her "Satan's niece." When Andy went in for his police exam, she made him a good luck charm: she found a dead rabbit at the side of the road, cut off its feet, and stuffed it before giving it to him. Andy loved it.
Odd Friendship: She becomes quite close with Leslie despite them having completely opposite personalities. Her no-nonsense attitude gets on the good side of Donna as well, to the point of being Donna's maid of honor at her wedding. Her initial friendship with Andy in Season 2 could also count, however, after they get married, they become more of the Odd Couple.
Opposites Attract: With peppy, dorky jock and rock singer Andy.
Pet the Dog: As befitting her being a Jerk with a Heart of Gold, April is capable of acts of true kindness here and there.
Her relationship with Andy starts as this; she befriends the goofball while he's having general life troubles, and finds spending time with him more enjoyable than with her mean gay boyfriend and his boyfriend. Realizing how they much prefer to Kick the Dog while Andy's influence makes her want to Pet it, she ends up choosing Andy.
Literally in Season 3 when she and Andy adopt a three-legged dog named Champion. She adores him, states he's one of the few things she cares about, and eventually admits that helping homeless animals get adopted is one of the few things that could get her passionate about a boring, administrative job.
In "Meet and Greet", after seeing how uncomfortable and disgusted Garry is over his daughter Millicent getting hot and heavy with Chris during the Halloween party, April swipes Chris' car keys so he won't be able to take Millicent back to his place to have sex with her.
After Leslie and Ben's argument in "The Treaty", she goes to console Leslie and encourages her to talk to Ben.
Guilty over successfully wishing misfortune upon Chris in "Bowling for Votes", she offers to take him to the movies with her and Andy with the tickets she won in the donation phone pool.
In Season 4, she sets Ann up with Tom because she genuinely thinks Tom makes her happy. She even tries to keep it a secret from Leslie because she knows about Ann's probable embarrassment.
Attempts to set Chris up with Andy's college professor. Though it's partially to get Chris off their backs, it was April who approached Chris first and invited him to dinner with them.
In Season 6, when she believes Garry to be very ill, she tries hard to be nice to him, to the point of actually reaching into his shirt and scratching his back for him.
Pitbull Dates Puppy: April is snarky, mischievous, and claims to hate everyone, while Andy is goofy, upbeat and full of energy.
Professional Slacker: It's the whole reason Ron hired her.
Ron: I don't care that you text all day and sleep at your desk. In fact, I encourage it.
Put on a Bus: The possibility is toyed with in Season 3, when Chris offers to take her back to Indianapolis with him to be his assistant. It was also teased in Season 6 with her vet school arc but ultimately averted when she backed out of going after getting a gut feeling.
Sarcastic Confession: In her words: "The truth is stupid. I only tell the truth when it makes me sound like I'm lying."
Secret Secret-Keeper: Reveals to Ron that she's aware of his double life as Duke Silver, as her mother has all of his albums and she recognized him the second they met.
She Cleans Up Nicely: April, being played by Aubrey Plaza, always looks pretty, but usually gives the impression that she doesn't fuss much about her personal appearance. As her character development goes on and she becomes more involved with her work, she starts looking a lot more polished.
Shouldn't We Be in School Right Now?: Similar to Ann's One-Hour Work Week, April is a college student, but this isn't mentioned very often and she never seems to have to be in class, which implies that whatever college she's attending is close enough for her to be at the office so often during the day. In the tie-in book Pawnee: The Greatest Town in America, April says she only takes one course a semester at Pawnee Community College.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Dumps her cynical, moody boyfriend (and his boyfriend) because she likes the good-natured Andy.
Spicy Latina:
She acknowledges the trope while she normally inverts it with extreme prejudice — she's the only major Latina character, but is the most asocial and emotionless.
April: (utterly deadpan) My mom's Puerto Rican. That's why I'm so lively and colorful.
When she's drunk, however, she makes those normally associated with the trope seem downright... stoic.
The Stoic: Played by Aubrey Plaza? That's pretty much a given (unless she's drunk).
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: April's cold, aloof and sometimes quite callous and anti-social. However she also has a sweeter side, which she occasionally shows to those she cares about.
Teen Hater: During the prom in the eponymous Season 6 episode, April explicitly tells Andy that she hates teenagers as an excuse to go home since she's embarrassed being in a high school building, while Andy still wants to dance.
That Makes Me Feel Angry: She has a tendency to blurt out her feelings: "I'm bored!" or "I'm cranky!" Her facial expression barely changes, however.
Took a Level in Kindness:
Starting from around season 3, but especially in season 4, April becomes a kinder, more considerate person to those she considers friends. But she's still a Troll and a Nightmare Fetishist.
Season 4 has her even list off the things she cares about (Andy, her dog Champion, Leslie, and the animal shelter), which the old April wouldn't have. She also starts giving relationship advice to Tom, Ann, and in season 5, Ron. She even admits (very begrudgingly) that she cares for Ann when saying goodbye to her in "Ann and Chris".
Troll: Even after taking several levels in kindness, April loves to make fun of or otherwise confuse people, and delights in a chance to do it to as many people as possible. Best exemplified in Flu Season 2 where she infiltrates a wine tasting, makes any number of absurd statements such as claiming the wine contains a robot's bathwater, stands up to make an acceptance speech when a professional sommelier wins the contest, and thanks numerous Eddie Murphy characters as she's escorted out.
Violently Protective Girlfriend: Do not embarrass Andy, hurt Andy's feelings, or be anything other than nice to Andy when she's around. Is usually more bark than bite but she's clearly furious when it happens so the potential is there. And if you are a woman, do not show any romantic interest in Andy whatsoever. He belongs to April.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Best is a major stretch, but she eventually develops a good friendship with Ann, albeit one she'd never admit to and is filled with mutual snarking and pranks.
Vocal Evolution: Her voice is softer and less expressive in the first two seasons than it is in later episodes.
When She Smiles: Especially in the early seasons; her few smiles are really pretty. After she loosens up a bit they start to become far more frequent and directed at people other than her Morality Pet Andy.
Why Did It Have to Be Spiders?: She has that arachnocornucopia thing.
Womanchild: Starts out as a college student, but continues acting like a moody high schooler well into her twenties.
Yaoi Fangirl:
April: I passed up a gay Halloween party to be here. Do you know how much fun gay Halloween parties are? Last year I saw three Jonas Brothers make out with three Robert Pattinsons. It was amazing.