Aerith and Bob: Her brothers LeVondrias and George.
Arbitrarily Large Bank Account: While to a lesser extent than Ron, Donna comes from a wealthy family and has enough disposable income to drop tens of thousands of dollars on shares at the Snakehole Lounge, owns a luxury car, and is paying for a mortgage on a condo in Seattle. However, it is played around with a bit, as part of the reason she likes Pawnee is that it allows her to live comfortably on a smaller budget while still taking care of her other expenses, and in Season 6, she earns her real estate license, just after Pawnee absorbs Eagleton but prior to the property boom which occurs during the time skip, even being drafted to broker Gryzzl's attempts to purchase a parcel of land which eventually sell for $125 million dollars.
Berserk Button: Do not touch her Mercedes.
Big Beautiful Woman: Donna is the most rotund character (next to Garry) and it doesn't do any harm to her ability to attract men, as she regularly hints at an active and very varied sex life. Andy's "codename" for her in "Bus Tour" is "It Happened Once In a Dream".
Black and Nerdy: Donna is a fan of Marvel movies, Game of Thrones, and fantasy novels. In one episode, she weaponizes her knowledge of Star Wars and midichlorians to expose a reporter from The Pawnee Sun who'd hacked Leslie's emails.
Donna: I love any book about vampires, werewolves, monsters, zombies, sorcerers, beasties, or time-traveling romances. [picks up a copy of Twilight] And if I had an hour alone with Robert Pattinson, he would forget all about Skinny Legs McGee, I'll tell you that much.
Character Development: Her relationships with members of the main cast grow deeper as the show goes on, particularly after Chris and Ann leave and Donna is given a bit more focus.
Characterization Marches On:
She is little more than a Living Prop in Season 1, barely ever interacting with her coworkers. Her appearance and calm demeanor also make her look older than she does from Season 2 onward.
Deleted scenes from two Season 2 episodes have someone asking Donna how she could afford her Mercedes, followed by a talking head of Donna saying she's in way over her head. It's only from the episode "Woman of the Year" onward that she is established as being very well-off financially.
Closet Geek: Not closeted exactly, since she'll openly admit her tastes if pressed, but she's a big fan of franchises such as Game of Thrones and cheesy eighties slashers such as "Death Canoe".
Cool Car: She's very proud of her 2006-2011 W164 Mercedes M-Class SUV, which she has named "Michael Fassbender".
Deadpan Snarker: Donna is always on hand to sarcastically comment on hijinks and roll her eyes.
Double Standard: Abuse, Female on Male: She tells Ron that her ex-boyfriend Joe is her "Tammy", which Ron takes to mean that Joe is an abusive Bitch in Sheep's Clothing until he realizes that he's actually a genuinely nice guy; Donna tells Ron that she meant that she changes when he's around him (i.e., becomes more introverted as he is), and didn't consider that as Ron might not appreciate comparing her loving if slightly boring relationship with his two abusive relationships. Ron calls out Donna's insensitivity, which convinces her to give Joe a second chance, leading to Donna and Joe eventually getting married in Season 7 after the three-year time skip.
Dude Magnet: Men flock to her even when she is not on the prowl, from the whole Venezuelan delegation to Colts linebacker Robert Mathis.
Dysfunctional Family: Comes from the passive-aggressive grudge holder variety. Donna lists off several examples - the last few Meagle family Pictionary tournaments all ended at the hospital and apparently, no more than 3 Meagles are allowed on an international plane together. Donna is herself estranged from her younger brother LeVondrias due to an incident involving microwaved popcorn and he was not invited to her wedding. Until April brought him anyway.
Ethical Slut: Heavily implied to sleep around a lot, but is no less valuable to the team for it.
The Fashionista: She has exceptional fashion sense and loves to wear stylish outfits. On "Treat Yo' Self Day," Donna purchases numerous ensembles and accessories, all of them expensive and flattering. Her fashion sense is one of the many reasons that she and Tom get along so well.
Happily Married: After spending much of her time on the series as a free bachelorette, she ultimately settles down with Joe in the final season.
Hidden Depths:
Although she looks like an average office worker, Donna is very cultured, well-traveled, sophisticated, and a trained opera singer, as is Retta.
Subverted for laughs in the episode "The Camel." Leslie assumes that Donna has a secret artistic streak because of her beautiful and elaborate manicures. Donna is quick to correct Leslie: she gets her nails done professionally.
In "Correspondents' Lunch," Leslie learns that a reporter from The Pawnee Sun has hacked her email account and is using the messages to undermine her. Donna is the one who comes up with a trap to expose the hacker by sending a fake email referencing midichlorians, a fictional substance for Star Wars, creating an Engineered Public Confession in front of the entire press corps.
Her taste in entertainment is somewhat at odds with her more cultured tastes. She's a trained opera singer with enough talent to come fourth in Italy's Got Talent but also loves Game of Thrones, slasher films, the Twilight franchise, and paranormal romances.
It's not elaborated on, but she knows enough about computers to install a back-up in case anything goes wrong.
History with Celebrity: R&B singer Ginuwine is her cousin. In "Moving Up" she pushes him to perform at the Unity Concert by threatening to spill embarrassing childhood stories.
I Call It "Vera": One episode reveals that she has named her Mercedes "Michael Fassbender" because "they're both German and they're both sexy as hell".
Jerkass Realization: Listening to the others make fun of Jerry makes her realize how mean she's been to him, and she's the first to encourage them to make amends.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Not jerky to the same extent as April, but she does come across as aloof and selfish. However, when she sees that someone needs help or the group is acting mean (usually to Garry), she'll immediately do the right thing.
Not So Above It All: She definitely has a taste for the finer things in life, but she happily bankrolls April when she decides to troll a bunch of pretentious judges at a wine tasting.
Odd Friendship: With Garry/Jerry/Larry/Terry. They know each other well enough to win Tom's Newlywed Game-style game show idea against the married April and Andy, she invites him to take part in her wedding cake tasting, and she cares about him enough to make sure that at her wedding, he'll be known by his real name, Garry. She's also one of the few characters to explicitly call him a friend. She also develops one with April in the later seasons, to the point of appointing April as her Maid of Honor.
Pet the Dog: She brings Ben to her annual "Treat Yo' Self" day with Tom, when she sees him eating soup by himself on a park bench. She also insists on bringing Garry to "Jerry Dinner" against April, Andy and Tom's protests, and at her wedding, she marks Jerry's spot on the table with his actual name Garry.
Phoneaholic Teenager: A decidedly adult version of this, Donna is frequently seen on her phone during office hours and plots about her are often about social media (e.g., live-tweeting a Death Canoe movie in "Halloween Surprise" and her account being the subject of a political witch-hunt in "Gin It Up!").
Promotion to Opening Titles: Along with Garry, after Chris and Ann left.
Really Gets Around: Until she settles down with Joe.
Sassy Black Woman: A black woman who is sarcastic, flamboyant, and easily annoyed.
Secretly Wealthy: It's never made clear exactly how rich she is (until the last season when she gets much richer through real estate), but she definitely has a lot more money than anyone else in the main cast save Ron. Her spending habits are similar to Tom's, but while he's explicitly crippled with debt from it she has cash on hand to drop 15 grand on club shares with no notice.
Sherlock Scan: She's actually pretty observant, as she could tell Ann was pregnant just from knowing her mannerisms, even accurately figuring out how far along she is. Then she asks Chris when he changed his underwear.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: After some resistance due to a difference in lifestyle, she gets together with Joe, an almost inhumanly-nice music teacher.
Vitriolic Best Buds: A one sided example with Jerry. While she teases him like everyone else, it's leans more towards light-hearted ribbing in her case and she's generally the one who recognizes when the others go too far. He's also on the receiving end of several of her Pet the Dog moments.
Watch the Paint Job: Her precious Mercedes is constantly in danger because of her coworkers.