10-Minute Retirement: Retires at the end of the fifth season, but is brought back part-time of the end of the same episode. He returns to the Parks Department full-time in the sixth season. And just when he's set to retire again towards the end of season 7, he is appointed the interim mayor of Pawnee, is elected to the post, and remains mayor until his death at the age of 100. Jerry/Larry/Terry/Garry just can't get a break, can he?
Accidental Misnaming: "The Trial of Leslie Knope" reveals his name is actually Garry.
Garry: On my first day here, the old director, he called me "Jerry" and I just didn't think I should correct him.
Alliterative Name: His real name, Garry Gergich. Not that anyone ever gets his name right.
Beneath the Mask: Later episodes have shown that it's actually difficult to maintain his upbeat attitude at the office in light of all the abuse he takes, which may lead to some of his clumsiness.
Bigger Is Better in Bed: His wife certainly must think so. In "I'm Leslie Knope", Dr. Harris reveals in a talking head that Garry has the biggest penis he has ever seen in all his years of being in the medical profession. In a deleted scene from season 5, Tom mentions Boogie Nights and Garry tells the gang that Gayle always said that he reminds her of the main character. Garry looks nothing like Mark Wahlberg, but his wife does know him a little bit more intimately than we do.
Boss's Unfavorite Employee: Garry is the Parks Department's resident Butt-Monkey, with everyone except Ben always ragging on him. Even hyper-kind do-gooders Leslie (who outranks everyone except the apathetic Ron) and Chris (who outranks everyone) put him down constantly.
Butt-Monkey: He gets yelled at and demeaned by everyone in the office, to the point where he's this show's version of Toby. Inverted when he's with his family and he inexplicably morphs into The Ace.
Ron: David Meyers, the Jewish guy who works at City Hall, once told me something: a schlemiel is the guy who spills soup at a fancy party. A schlimazel is the guy he spills it on. Jerry is both the schemiel and the schlimazel of our office.
Catchphrase: "Oh jeez..." whenever someone yells at him for doing something wrong. Which happens all the time.
Characterization Marches On: Unlike his portrayal from season 2 onwards, in his first on-screen interaction with Leslie, she is the one who does something stupid (eating a non-edible plant), while Garry keeps a calm Reasonable Authority Figure demeanor.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Not in any traditional sense, but when Leslie finally sees Garry's home life, it's very clear that he's a completely different person around his family and even though they can be completely over-the-top with how sickeningly sweet they are, he's probably the most content and self-assured person in the entire series. Contrasted with how he's shown around his co-workers throughout most of the series, this is a pretty huge contrast.
Deceptive Legacy: When Mark accuses Garry of hiding how his adopted mother was arrested for drug possession, Garry reveals he never knew he was adopted.
Doting Parent: He has three daughters, all of whom he dotes on. In turn, they positively adore him.
Dumb, but Diligent: Jerry is a klutz and doesn't posses any of the flashy, impressive office skills of his co-workers. However, he's the one who has the highest tolerance for the necessary grunt work that the others have no interest in because they consider it boring or beneath them, which makes him vital to the department. Donna even finds his rhythmic ability to stuff and seal hundreds of envelopes mesmerizing to watch.
Earn Your Happy Ending: After all the abuse he took from his coworkers, his dependability finally gets recognized, when Ben suggests he serve as the interim Mayor. He becomes so beloved by the whole of Pawnee for his role, he remains the mayor through write-in votes until his death at the age of 100.
Extreme Doormat: He's a bit weak-willed and takes the abuse without a word of protest. However, it really doesn't get to him much.
Flanderization: Thanks to Early-Installment Weirdness, Garry in Season 1 is depicted as competent and responsible enough to lead a group of kids on a field trip in plant identification; it's Leslie who's so incompetent that without waiting for Garry's say-so, she eats a weed which makes her tongue swell up. By Season 6, Garry can't even bend over without trashing a room.
Formerly Fit: He used to be slimmer and trimmer in his younger years (much like Chris) before gaining weight due to a combination of age and sympathy for Gayle's three pregnancies.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He's kind and caring to all of his coworkers, and is always invited to major events in their lives, but everyone treats him like crap, unless it's something serious, like the time he had a heart attack in which even Tom, his biggest tormenter, turned his cruelty into concern (although he still really wanted the doctor to just say "fart attack").
Gag Penis: According to Dr. Harris, Garry has one of these. The biggest the doctor's ever seen, in fact.
Gasshole: Has been this at times, and it always happens at the worst possible moments. Especially when he has a heart attack (Ann explains that flatulence is a common side effect of heart attacks), but since Tom is present, it of course becomes Black Comedy.
Good Parents: He is adored by his three daughters. When Chris proposes a rather old-fashioned idea of seeking Garry's approval in order to court his daughter Millicent, Garry immediately shuts this down by saying his daughter is a grown woman who can make her own decisions.
Go Out with a Smile: Dies peacefully on his 100th birthday, happily holding hands with Gayle and surrounded by his large and beautiful family.
Happily Married: To his wife Gayle. Ben even says that Gayle and Garry are the most stable marriage he knows.
Hidden Depths: He's a very good and impossibly fast artist. In "The Camel", he's the only member of the Parks Department (other than Tom, who simply purchased his from an art student) to produce a decent entry for the mural replacement — a pointillism photo collage of City Hall composed of pictures of Pawnee residents. However, a slip of the tongue causes everyone to just write it off as crap.
Though clumsy around the office, his reaction time and reflexes are amazing at home. He's also shown to be a highly talented pianist.
In one gag Garry reveals he enjoys tinkering in his garage, and is so good at it he inadvertently creates what he believes to be a source of clean, renewable energy - something some of the world's top scientists have been trying - and failing - to achieve for decades. While his invention is immediately dismissed thanks to an ill-timed sneeze - and shortly thereafter destroyed thanks to another - the fact remains that this mild-mannered butt monkey has the intelligence to develop technology that could make him a billionaire, earn him a Nobel prize, and comfortably place him as not just one of the smartest people in the cast, but one of the most brilliant minds in human history.
I Have Many Names: He's actually named Garry Gergich, but on his first day on the job, the department director mistakenly called him "Jerry" and he didn't have the nerve to correct him, so it stuck until his retirement. When he returned to the Department a few months later, April declared his real name was Larry Gengurch after he requested they started using his real name instead of Jerry. At some point during the Time Skip in "Moving Up," the office began calling him Terry instead; on the Johnny Karate Super Awesome Musical Explosion Show, he also plays Mailman Barry. At the very end of the series, everyone starts calling him by his real name. Noted when the guys burnt their initials into a "Buddy Box" for Chris as a going-away present.
Chris: [confused] Who's GJLGG?
Garry: Garry Jerry Larry Gergich Gengurch.
Impossibly Tacky Clothes: He actually dresses in completely unremarkable business casual the majority of the time, it's just that he has no interest whatsoever in what's trendy. Tom naturally picks on him endlessly for this.
Incredibly Lame Fun: The reason he keeps coming out of retirement; he just really likes doing tedious paperwork nobody else can stand. When he gets his Notary Public License, he's giddy about it for months. He mentions taking a vacation to Muncie, Indiana, which is basically the municipal equivalent of Ridiculously Average Guy. He and his wife have a timeshare there.
I Was Quite a Looker: Before Gayle's first pregnancy, Garry supposedly had a similar figure to Chris, but he put on sympathy-weight he couldn’t shake off. Chris wasn’t thrilled to hear this.
Jerkass to One: Jerry is by and large the nicest man you can never meet... unless your name is Kyle.
Kavorka Man: Sort of. His wife is absolutely stunning and completely adores him, despite him being old, overweight and unattractive, but otherwise, all other women are just as openly disgusted by him as men are. He's even the one person who Mona Lisa Saperstein wouldn't have sex with, giving him a "hard pass", though Garry just gives a big smile at that.
The Klutz: At the office and in public, but not in his home. His favorite ice cream place always scoops him a second cone for when he drops the first one. At home this is completely Inverted.
Malicious Misnaming:
At the start of the sixth season, April effectively changes his name to "Larry Gengurch." He's been known exclusively as "Larry" ever since. Even NBC's website for the show now recognizes him as Larry Gengurch!
During the Time Skip at the end of "Moving Up", people began calling him "Terry" due to there being another Larry. In Season 7, he uses that name until Donna uses "Garry" on his banquet placecard, at which point everyone starts calling him that.
In the series finale, even his headstone winds up getting his name wrong.
Nice Guy: Despite being constantly dumped on by his coworkers and by the universe in general, Garry doesn't have a mean-spirited bone in his body. The only exception is Kyle, whom even Garry can't help but be a jerk to.
Oblivious Adoption: Had no idea he was adopted until Mark looked up his background and mentioned that his adoptive mother had been arrested for marijuana possession. Garry just said he didn't know he was adopted.
Odd Friendship: With Donna. They know each other well enough to win Tom's "Know Your Boo" game show attempt, and she cares about him enough to make sure that at her wedding, he'll be known by his real name, Garry. She makes fun of him like everyone else, but in her case it comes off as light-hearted ribbing most of the time and she recognizes when the others go too far. She's also one of the few characters to explicitly call him her friend.
Older Than They Look/Younger Than They Look: Oddly combined in that Garry is supposed to be sixty-four as of the fourth season (the episode "Sweet Sixteen" discusses his Leap Day birthday), and of course has a lot of Informed Flaw in terms of his appearance, but when that episode aired, Jim O'Heir was only fifty. In fact, he's eight years younger than Christie Brinkley, who was cast as Garry's wife.
Phrase Catcher: "Dammit, Jerry!"
Promotion to Opening Titles: Along with Donna, after Chris and Ann left.
The Scapegoat: Everything is always Garry's fault, whether it actually is or not.
Self-Deprecation:
In "Jerry's Painting", he tells Leslie that allowing the painting to be destroyed is something he would do, and that he didn't expect her to give in.
A comedic example in "The Bubble": Chris says he believes Garry is capable of so much more. Garry's immediate reply is a flat "I'm not."
Shrinking Violet: Doesn't confront anyone over anything, including saying his name right. This is why Ron feels Garry does best in his menial position.
Ron: Jerry can only function when no one's looking. You shine a light on him and he shrinks up faster than an Eskimo's scrotum.
Technologically Blind Elders: His way of getting to his Yahoo email is to go on Altavista and type "please take me to Yahoo.com" and has no clue what bookmarks are.
This Looks Like a Job for Aquaman!: He doesn't have Leslie's motivation, Ron's hands-on skills, or Tom's charisma. Basically, all he's good for in the office is mindless busywork like collating, taking phone calls, licking envelopes, and filing papers. That said, he's really good at it. Donna even becomes hypnotized by him licking and sealing envelopes for hours on end without getting bored or tired. He's almost Zen about it. When Ben needs to get copies of April's resume typed up and sent to dozens of prospective employers, he knew there was only one man for the job.
Ben: Get me Garry Gergich!
Throw the Dog a Bone: Gets three pretty significant ones in season 7:
In "Donna & Joe" Donna labels Garry's dining place with his real name, thereby ensuring his co-workers will now address him by that name, albeit in a mocking way. He's thrilled about this development.
And then in "Two Funerals" Ben appoints Garry Interim Mayor of Pawnee after the incumbent Mayor dies two months before his term is up, complete with a completely over-the-top inauguration ceremony, where Garry is carried to a hot-air balloon by a Roman legion and then flies away.
In "One Last Ride", Garry is then elected mayor of Pawnee for real, and then proceeds to fill the office for the rest of his life, adored by his large family and loved by the people of Pawnee. Even his death is unbelievably heartwarming: He dies peacefully in his sleep, holding the hand of his beloved Gayle (who looks AMAZING).
Too Spicy for Yog-Sothoth: Garry is the only person Mona-Lisa Saperstein showed no interest in sleeping with.
True Love is Exceptional: Played for Laughs when he reveals that his utterly gorgeous wife Gayle actually didn't physically appeal to him at first.
Garry: I met Gayle right here at Sherm's [ice cream shop]. She was slim, blonde hair, big breasts, long legs. Ugh, not my type at all.
The Ugly Guy's Hot Daughter: His three girls are stunners, despite him not being portrayed as particularly good-looking. When Chris meets his daughter Millicent, he congratulates Garry.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: His wife Gayle is played by Christie Brinkley◊, and is considered an absolute beauty in-universe. After he first meets her, it becomes a Running Gag for Ben to wonder how they got together. The reaction of the other characters is something of a joke on Garry's Butt-Monkey status. That said, Garry is a quintessential Nice Guy and devoted Family Man — and also a talented artist, far more confident when he's away from the office, and he casually mentions that he looked a lot like Chris in his younger years. It's also revealed that he's remarkably well-endowed.