But for Me, It Was Tuesday: Non-villainous example. Some years prior to the first season, Mark and Leslie slept together once. This was a very important event in Leslie's life and she imagines their working relationship has been filled with Unresolved Sexual Tension since. Mark sleeps with so many women that he barely even remembers it.
The Casanova: In the first season. He later dropped this when he and Ann began dating in the second season, and actually was a faithful boyfriend.
Character Development: In the second season, he began a steady relationship with Ann and stayed faithful to her. On their first Valentine's Day together, he (admittedly) gives her every clichéd Valentine's Day gift he can think of because it's the first time he's been able to give someone such a gift. In the first episode of Season 2, Ann notes that his personality seems to have shifted overnight after he suffered a head injury at the end of Season 1. Mark himself describes the incident as one that made him rethink his life a little.
Chuck Cunningham Syndrome: Despite his prominence early on, Mark was never seen, heard from, or mentioned again after he was Put on a Bus at the end of Season 2, to the point of almost seeming like an Un-person in the eyes of the writers. Ironically enough, Michael Schur himself even promised that Mark would return every once in a while, but those plans never came to fruition and Paul Schneider was never contacted about making any reappearances. It's especially notable in the episodes "Halloween Surprise" (where he is the only ex-boyfriend of Ann's to not be referenced when she assembles her "ex-boyfriend boxes") and "Pawnee Commons" (where the park plans he drew up for Lot 48 at the end of Season 2 are completely forgotten about). The only remnants of his existence in the final season are the replacement mural drawing he made in "The Camel" of a man feeding birds and the name of the construction company he was leaving the Pawnee government for being mentioned in passing. He's also notably one of the few characters to not make a cameo appearance in the seventh and final season, doesn't appear in any flashback clips, and isn't in the 2020 Reunion Show either.
Deadpan Snarker: Would often make sarcastic remarks about those around him, especially Tom.
The Generic Guy: For two seasons, he stood in the middle of a cast of more interesting characters and acted sane. Obviously, a Straight Man is supposed to do that, but unlike other characters who have fulfilled this role on the show (such as Ben), Mark lacked any quirks that allowed the character to take part in the shenanigans. It probably didn't help that one of the few notable personality traits he did have, being a womanizer, was mostly on display in the polarizing first season and was shared with Tom who had quirks outside of that. It's lampshaded when Ann admits that she just didn't feel their relationship had the right "spark" when explaining why she's breaking up with him and her relationship with Andy may have been unhealthy but at least was interesting.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Pre Character Development, while fairly sleazy and sarcastic, he often felt genuinely guilty whenever he hurt somebody.
Ladykiller in Love: How his Character Development happened — he was something of a lothario in Season 1, but settles into a relationship with Ann in Season 2.
Laser-Guided Karma: Hit on Ann before she actually broke up with Andy, and then fell into the Pit behind Ann's house later that night, just as Andy had done to inaugurate the series.
My God, What Have I Done?: In "Practice Date", he eagerly joins in with a game in which the department go dig up dirt on one another, but accidentally reveals to Garry that he was adopted. At this point, he feels he's gone too far and backs out entirely.
Perma-Stubble: He doesn't grow out a beard.
Put on a Bus: At the end of Season 2, Ann breaks up with him and he leaves the government to work for a construction company after Pawnee is declared bankrupt.
Long Bus Trip: Even though Pawnee is a fairly small town where it would've been easy to run into him again, he never makes another appearance. The writers did plan to have Mark reappear once in a while as a Drop-In Character, but couldn't really figure out how to work him back in and Paul Schneider had no desire to return to the show again, leading to this.
Romantic False Lead: He was this for both Leslie and Ann.
Mark and Leslie had hooked up some years before the start of the series, and Leslie still harbored a big crush on him while he actually forgot about that night when it gets brought up. They almost rekindled it in the first season finale but Leslie backed out of it because they were both drunk, and she ultimately moves on from it in the second season, first through a brief relationship with a police officer named Dave, then briefly goes out with Ann's lawyer friend Justin, and ultimately gets together officially with Ben.
In the case of Ann, Mark was the second serious boyfriend she had in her life after she left Andy, and although she appreciated Mark's stability and maturity, she ultimately broke it off with him after realizing the relationship just wasn't exciting her or keeping her interested. After various ups and downs, she officially gets together with Chris.