The Ace: Ron is a skilled outdoorsman, woodworker, musician, and machinist. He's also shown to be very good at solving difficult puzzles, and he apparently has some medical knowledge such as how to do a tracheotomy and how to deliver a baby that's coming out face-up.
Acquired Poison Immunity: His family has their own brand of moonshine, which legally can only be used to strip the varnish off speedboats, and some select uses on the Swanson farm. This and his greasy diet are the only plausible reasons why he can knock back so much alcohol yet never get hung over. (Tom's Snakejuice only got him drunk due to its higher-than-normal alcohol content, but he suffered no ill effects the morning after.)
Acrofatic: Downplayed—Ron isn't fat, but he does have a stocky build. Nevertheless, he is still rather agile and athletic.
Affluent Ascetic: Ron owns so much gold that the five percent he plans to leave to each of his kids is considered a lot of money. His spending habits are quite modest, and he builds as many of his possessions as he can.
All Amazons Want Hercules:
When handsome, cheerful, politically correct, environmentally-aware Chris Traeger tries to hit on Andy's vegetarian Women's Studies professor, she rejects him in favor of the gruff, mustachioed, carnivorous Ron. The fact that Ron was polite and Chris was not probably contributed.
While she considers him just a friend first and foremost, Leslie admits to having had an Erotic Dream about Ron once.
In general, while many women (and men) are attracted to him, his romantic partners have all been strong, confident women at the top of their chosen fields, which lead him to marrying the Tammy's. he eventually finds love with the forthright and confident, but ultimately reasonable and good-hearted Diane who, in a meta example of this trope, is played by none other than Lucy Lawless, best known for her portrayal of ultimate Amazon Xena.
Amazon Chaser: Ron has a clearly defined type. He mentions several times that he prefers "strong, independent women," and he's got the dating history to back it up. This is Deconstructed in that it's been a problem for him in the past. His tastes lead him to marry two different ex-wives who both took great glee in completely dominating every facet of his life and personality. In the end it's Reconstructed when Ron finds lasting happiness with the tough and no-nonsense but still fundamentally good-hearted Diane, who can put the fear of God into Tammy 2 with a simple Death Glare... and who fittingly enough is played by Lucy Lawless; Xena, the Warrior Princess.
AM/FM Characterization: One of his favorite songs is "Buddy" by Willie Nelson.
Anti-Education Mama: Whilst espousing the virtues of a college education, Ron admits that his father was actually against him going to college believing it was a waste of time, to the point that despite Ron being accepted when it came time to go, his father instead dropping him off at the metal factory and drove off leaving him there. Ron was forced to hitchhike his way to college.
Authority in Name Only: While he is still well-respected by his subordinates and will occasionally exert his absolute authority when he strongly disagrees with something, for all intents and purposes, Leslie is the real head of the Parks Department, with Ron simply kicking back and leaving everything to her most of the time. He only really gets involved if Leslie violates a city rule or if Ron vehemently disagree's with her opinion on something.
Baritone of Strength: He has the deepest voice of anyone in the cast, and one of the central aspects of his character is how incredibly badass he is, while also giving words of wisdom with his low assertive voice. To put it into perspective, every onscreen fight he's been involved in has ended in a single punch.
Beneath the Mask: Secretly cares a great deal about his coworkers, though would never admit it and shows it in usually indirect ways.
Benevolent Boss: He's the government-hating director of the Parks Department and leaves 99% of the work to Leslie, but he's actually a much better manager than he lets on. He is very astute to how the department is run and where his coworkers' strengths lie and how to work around their weaknesses. He secretly cares about them all a great deal, though would never admit to it. Arguably best shown in "The Bubble" where Ron convinces Chris to lay off with all the office changes by listing how it's affecting workplace productivity. Ron would love nothing more than seeing government work come to a screeching halt and collapse, but convinces Chris to undo the changes he made upon seeing how miserable his friends are.
Beta Couple: With Diane as of Season 5.
Big Eater: Especially in regards to red meat and breakfast meals; all other foodstuffs are treated with suspicion or outright derision. The only thing that interests him in a strip club is the breakfast buffet. He says that if he does not have at least three breakfast meals a day, he acts like a tired whiny child. He has an enormous picture of bacon and eggs framed in his office.
Ron: Just give me all the bacon and eggs you have... Wait, wait. I worry what you just heard was, "Give me a lot of bacon and eggs." What I said was, "Give me all the bacon and eggs you have." Do you understand?
He can eat a party platter meant to feed 12 people in four minutes.
He also holds a number of records around Pawnee for eating large amounts of food very quickly.
Ron: Why is everyone else so bad at eating?
He tends to shy away from "ethnic food", but greatly enjoyed eating from a burrito place when Andy mentions the "Meat Tornado", which has apparently killed someone in the past. Ron thought of it as "revolutionary", and was effusive in his gratitude for Andy introducing him to "an entirely new meat delivery system".
Despite having a horrendous diet and a literal gag reaction whenever forced to eat any form of fruit or vegetable he is actually quite healthy for a man who should have more cholesterol in his veins than blood, something with Ann notes as being highly unusual.
Ron: [annoyed] What's cholesterol?
In the last season Jeremy Jamm tried to adopt Ron's eating habits; after a few weeks it was clearly killing him.
Birthday Hater: He hates birthdays so much that he has gone to great lengths to keep anyone from finding out his own, including having it redacted from all government documents. Needless to say, he is not pleased when Leslie discovers his:
Ron: I don't like loud noises. And people making a fuss. And I especially don't like people celebrating because they know a piece of private information about me. Plus the whole thing is a scam — birthdays were invented by Hallmark to sell cards.
Breakout Character: He's by far the most popular character among fans, and some TV critics have called him the best sitcom character since Cosmo Kramer. Starting from the third season, his Men Are Tough characteristics are amplified, such as his love for Meat and food.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Played With. As shown by the excellent handling of his own business; "Very Good Building Company", Ron is an extremely competent entrepreneur and manager, and it was only his hatred of government that kept him from doing anything in the Parks Department. Outside of the department he can be downright workaholic and has happily been in steady employment since childhood and rewards and encourages ambition and hard work in others; his apathy in the Parks and Rec office is just intentional sabotage based on his principles.
Cannot Spit It Out: A platonic version. He can't just tell his friends that he cares about and cherishes them deeply. Then there was the very short time when he was infuriated by people telling him to just say that he loves Diane, with whom he had been dating for quite some time.
Catchphrase: "Bully for you", and "Please and thank you".
Character Development: While he initially starts as a no-nonsense libertarian who couldn’t care less about his co-workers, over time he comes to see them as more than just acquaintances. This is what causes the incident known as Morning Star. When Leslie moves on and begins taking some of Ron's coworkers with her and when the rest left, he suddenly realized one day he didn't know anyone in his office space. While he is hesitant to admit, he came to view his co-workers as another fond constant in his life and eventually came to view them as friends. Which he doesn't deny when Leslie calls them such. Ron was even willing to work with the Federal government if it meant working with his old crew again.
Ron possesses a strong distaste for fruits and vegetables, and will not indulge in eating what he considers food that his food eats. When he has to eat a banana to get his potassium up, he looks at a picture of his girlfriend and her children to motivate him to do so.
Characterization Marches On:
While we get very little of Ron's personality in Season 1 (his begrudging respect for Leslie is ever present-however), early Ron Swanson doesn't share Season 2-onwards Ron's Manly Man aspects. Even his costume-based characterization is absent. Season 1 Ron wears a suit instead of rugby shirts and flannels and keeps his hair in a more office-friendly coif. Him exclusively wearing his Season 2 getup and haircut for years is explicitly noted in season seven (Leslie's notes that the exact outfit Ron is wearing in front of her at that moment in time is the same as in her first ever interview at Parks.).
While Ron made his distaste for government known from the first episode, there are some moments in the show's first two seasons where he seemingly took his job a little more seriously. His debut scene in the pilot episode is him leading a government meeting (about another government meeting, no less), to absolutely no comedic effect. He also tells Leslie that he has not gone to inspect the pit on Lot 48 "yet," rather than "at all" (which he would be more likely to flat-out state in later episodes). Even in "94 Meetings," which takes place late into Season 2, he insists on ensuring that all of the meetings April mistakenly scheduled for him end up taking place (albeit in a very convoluted way).
Comedic Mustache: When Ron briefly gets back together with Tammy 2, his hypersexual ex-wife, he seemingly changes his mustache because his hair had changed to braided cornrows. However, when asked why he changed his mustache. Ron admits that he didn't change or shave his mustache; it rubbed off from friction. Which, appropriately, disgusts Ben and Leslie.
Comically Missing the Point: The reason his favorite book is Moby-Dick?
Ron: No frou-frou symbolism. Just a good, simple tale about a man who hates an animal.
The Comically Serious: He rarely cracks actual jokes, as most of the humor that comes from Ron stems from the situations he's put in and the interactions he has with the other characters.
Crazy-Prepared: Keeps a survival backpack hidden in a ventilation grate down the hall. Also keeps a small supply of ground chuck in his desk drawer, and a large packet of bacon above the ceiling tiles of his office.
Ron retrieves the bag after his first ex-wife shows up. It's labeled, indicating that Ron prepared it specifically to escape from Tammy One.
All that gold he has buried? Quite a lot of it is fake gold just in case someone manages to figure out where the stashes are all hidden.
A deleted scene from "Ron and Leslie" reveals he had a secret stash of whiskey in the wall of his original office that he made on the first day he'd gotten the job just in case he ever got trapped there somehow.
Another deleted scene reveals that he had bacon caches in 37 other places in the office, including inside the photocopier and underneath Tom, because of an anticipated worldwide bacon shortage, or as Ron describes it, "total [bleep] global [bleep]."
Deadpan Snarker: He is often sarcastic toward his coworkers and people in general, it is actually one of the many things he has in common with April.
Double Standard: Abuse, Female on Male: Defied. Despite his overt masculinity, Ron has faced emotional, mental, and sexual abuse from both of his ex wives, including getting with much older Tammy 1 while he was underage (Not only was she his Sunday School teacher, she was a candy-striper on the ward where he was born.) These aspects of his character are explored in much depth and are never played for laughs, with his friends fiercely defending him from both whenever necessary.
Drink-Based Characterization: He drinks Lagavulin 16, neatnote , which other characters find too strong to swallow. This reinforces his characterization as someone who's tough, direct, and has discerning tastes. He's also able to chug half-a-jug of Swanson Family Mash Liquor — strong enough to strip varnish and burn off warts — with no reaction when even Tammy Zero and Tammy One (women who can emotionally dominate and manipulate Ron) wince at the burning sensation to show that he has hidden levels of strength and willpower beyond what others already knew about.
The Engineer: Builds lots of things himself. Including a crib that he tested by hitting with his car. The grill is loose, the chrome molding is bent, and the right headlight is missing as a result.
Everyone Has Standards: He tries reasoning with a local dealership for a fleet of vans, but the Newports had bought them out, and the dealer fully intends to take the money, and rip up the existing contract. Ron later tells them that while his word is sacred, and he never lies for anyone else, the dealer was being such an asshole that he lied on the behalf of Donna when she rear-ended the dealer, and claimed that Donna was the one who was rear-ended instead.
Everyone Loves Blondes: Inverted. While he doesn't hate them, after his relationship with Tammy One, he only dates dark-haired women because she ruined blondes for him.
Extreme Doormat: Becomes this when around his first wife, Tammy 1. Leslie even calls him "neutered Ron Swanson"
Family Man: Gradually grows into this when he marries Diane and becomes the father to her daughters, and eventually when his son John is born.
Family Theme Naming: Ron, his brothers (Don, Lon, and Vaughn), and his son (John) all have first names that rhyme with "on".
A Father to His Men: Despite being taciturn, grumpy, stingy, and insistent that people solve their own problems, he nevertheless often offers to help his friends when they need it, and often in very generous ways, such as giving Andy a scholarship, loaning money for Tom's business, and helping Leslie in many ways through out the series.
Flanderization: His Manly Man traits ramp up as the series continues as the writers begin to embrace his badassery. He also goes from someone who greatly values his privacy to being almost completely disconnected from human society.
Foil: His disdain for government work and cynical view of social and political systems directly clashes with Leslie's more ambitious and naively idealistic endeavors.
His Manly Man tendencies contrast strongly with Tom's Camp Straight personality.
Friend to All Children: For all his gruffness he gets along surprisingly well with kids. He typically doesn't interact with them, but forms a friendship with the young Lauren Burkiss when they talk about government. When Ron meets Diane's daughters for the first them, they immediately adore him and get excited when they get to spend time with him. Initially he's annoyed, but warms up to the girls quickly. Spending time with and acting as a father for Andy, who himself has a very childish personality, probably mellowed him out.
Functional Addict: The quantity of hard liquor he consumes (one shelf per week by his own account) and the casualness with which he pours himself a whisky in every situation easily puts him into the territory of serious alcoholism, yet he shows no physical or mental deterioration typical for heavy drinkers.
Gleeful and Grumpy Pairing: The Grumpy to Leslie's Gleeful. Leslie is incredibly enthusiastic and outgoing, while Ron is reserved and usually in a surly mood.
Good Parents:
Ron, despite his gruffness and personality, fiercely loves his stepdaughters Zoey and Ivy, and his son Jon.
Considering he's also the Parental Substitute for Andy and April, he also counts as this towards them.
Good Stepmother: A gender-inverted version, but Ron genuinely does love Diane's daughters and even indulges in their interests despite him clearly not enjoying it, but sticks through it for their sake. As the series goes on, Zoey and Ivy even refer to him as their father.
Happily Married: To Diane as of the beginning of Season 6 after three miserable marriages to Tammy 1 and Tammy 2 (twice).
Has a Type: In his own words, Ron is attracted to "Strong, self-sufficient women at the top of their fields". As such, the majority of his romantic interests are women in positions of authority with forceful personalities. While this has caused a large degree of unhappiness, he eventually finds love with the forceful, forthright, but fundamentally good-hearted Diane, who is willing to accept his quirks while still putting him in his place when needed.
This tendency briefly leads to Diane believing that the similarly forceful Leslie is a threat to their relationship, as she fears she may never reach the same level of intimacy with him.
Hates Being Touched: As shown by his tendency to awkwardly just stand there whenever someone (usually Andy) hugs him. Ron really dislikes hugs.
Hates Small Talk: You're at best going to get a curt dismissal and at worst a Death Glare if you attempt to instigate pointless small talk with him.
Healing Factor: Specifically, his hair. No matter what happens to Ron's hair, it always grows back by the next couple of episodes, especially his mustache. At one point, he accidentally burnt his facial hair and eyebrows off and then ran off to hide in the woods when finding out his first ex-wife was coming, and three weeks later when Leslie comes looking for him, he's sprouted a massive mountain-man beard that would take a lesser mortal years to grow.
Henpecked Husband: Around Tammy One, he becomes a complete pushover who needs permission to even go to the bathroom. She's conditioned him so thoroughly that the transformation from alpha male to milquetoast is reflexive when he's in her presence.
Hidden Depths:
Ron moonlights as jazz saxophonist "Duke Silver" and plays in clubs outside Pawnee. He's really good in general with woodwind instruments and is very good at crafting flutes and recorders (which he then sells to a loony doomsday cult because they always play them at their end-of-the-world vigils).
He secretly loves artichokes and plums.
Ron is shown to absolutely LOVE solving scavenger hunt puzzles, and becomes uncharacteristically giddy at the prospect of completing them.
Even though he is as stereotypically masculine as humanly possible, Ron is also a supporter of women's rights who attends a shocking number of WNBA games, according to Leslie.
Is a very prominent father-figure for April and Andy, who often go to him for advice and although Ron would never openly admit it, he does care for them deeply. Ron is also the beloved stepfather to Diane's daughters, Zoey and Ivy, and even changes his lifestyle to make sure he's prominent within their lives, and includes both of them in his will. Heck, with convincing from Ben, Ron gives them 5% of his fortune which is implied to have set the girls up for their entire life.
Despite his hatred of it, when the governmental work needs to get done, he steps up considerably. In the Season 2 episode "Christmas Scandal", he takes over most of Leslie's duties for the day and shows surprising competence at it.
Despite being a fiscal conservative, he's remarkably liberal in other senses, choosing to judge others by their character rather than their demographics.
Hypocritical Humor:
"When I buried gold in my backyard, I promised myself I would not be miserly with it."
Ron's a libertarian who believes in freedom from undue influence and that everyone should have the ability to run their lives however they want. However, he also possesses a very forceful, imposing personality which can frequently lead him towards trying to dominate everyone around him and get them to run their lives the way he thinks they should be run, inadvertently or otherwise.
Ron's love of alcohol is frequently mentioned, saying "There's no wrong way to consume alcohol" and telling Ann he consumes one shelf a week. However, he is also on record as saying, with contempt, that "clear alcohols are for rich women on diets". He's also condescending and critical towards former director Michael Tansley for smoking pot, even handwaving one of Michael's sentences with "Sorry, I don't speak to hippies".
I Choose to Stay: Ron turns down the job of Deputy City Manager to stay as Parks and Recreation Director, despite his desire to slash budgets, because he's grown fond of his co-workers
Iconic Outfit: Red shirt and black pants after he's had sex. According to Tom, the same as Tiger Woods wears when he feels invincible.
Intergenerational Friendship: With April, though he fulfills a more fatherly role to her and she happens to be one of the few people who he enjoys spending time with.
With Lauren Burkiss, a nine-year old. He compliments her open-mindedness about government and tells her he enjoyed talking with her, as well as calling her "much smarter" than most people who work in the local government. That is huge praise coming from Ron.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He may act like he hates all his coworkers, the government, and human society in general, but he's shown on more than one occasion that if any of them is seriously hurting or in trouble, he'll be there for them.
Kavorka Man: Not considered especially attractive, but still manages to attract many women with his gruff personality, and that's without counting Duke Silver's fanbase of swooning middle-aged ladies. When he drops by the local gay bar to find one of the clues Leslie left for Ben's gift, many of the patrons are clearly checking him out. Ron definitely does have the looks of a "Bear".
Laborious Laziness: He can go to incredible lengths to avoid doing his job. In fact, he took a government job in the first place so he could make sure nothing meaningful ever gets done.
Ron: I'd work all night if it meant nothing got done.
Like a Son to Me:
He regards April as similar to a daughter, and she is closer to him than to either of her actual parents.
Although he would never admit it, it's clear he also views Andy as being this.
Despite his dislike for some of his tastes, has this relationship with Tom, as well.
Like Parent, Like Spouse: Exaggerated Trope and Played for Laughs. Has two ex-wives and a mother named Tammy.
Likes Older Women: Both of his ex-wives are distinctly older than him.
Love Makes You Crazy: Hanging around Tammy One turns him into a complete wuss. Tammy Two turns him into a raging sex fiend.
Made of Iron: In "Hunting Trip", he takes a shotgun blast to the back of the head, and spends the rest of the episode more angry than debilitated. He also survived getting hit by a school bus when he was seven years old.
Manly Facial Hair: Not only is the man himself manly bar none with the strength and toughness that comes with it (by sitcom standards, of course), the mustache itself is badass enough to come back to full form within mere days of being singed or trimmed off. When he loses the mustache, it shows how henpecked he is due to Tammy 1 domineering him.
Manly Man: An interesting version of this. Ron is gruff, loves working with his hands, eats a lot of meat, drinks a lot of whiskey, and is a strong fighter. But this doesn't translate into racism, sexism, or homophobia like other examples might. Combined with his distrust of the government and big business, Ron could be considered the true libertarian ideal if he wasn't a parody of such beliefs.
Manly Tears: He's cried very few times in his life. The first time was when a bus ran into him as a child. The second was when he first learned of Li'l Sebastian's death. He very nearly cries a third time in "Citizen Knope" in reaction to Leslie's Christmas gift — remote-controlled closing doors for his office. He comes close to crying once again in "London, Part 2" after reading Robert Burns' "O were my Love yon Lilack fair" during his time in Scotland, and he nearly gets very emotional when he tells Leslie that her friendship means a lot to him as he is about to walk her down the aisle. Finally, his eyes can be seen welling up in "Leslie and Ron" as he recounts what happened to estrange him from Leslie (as well as in the flashback, following April's departure from the department).
Meaningful Name: "Ron" is a name with roots in Hebrew and Old Norse meaning "mountain of strength". This is perfectly befitting Ron Swanson's Manly Man personality.
Meat Versus Veggies: The meat eater to Chris's veggie eater.
Mentor Archetype: He essentially mentors the entire cast to varying degrees, most obviously Andy, April, and Leslie.
Modern Major General: He's a man of many talents, but local government bureaucracy is certainly not among them.
Morality Pet: Andy has slowly been softening him up. He is also noticeably close with April, whom he regards akin to a daughter and is genuinely distraught when she leaves the department.
My God, What Have I Done?: Downplayed given that Ron doesn't express his emotions openly, but after April accidentally schedules 93 meetings for him in one day, he yells at her, which results in her quitting. Ron refuses to admit fault until Andy points out she just made an honest mistake, to which Ron realizes he took his anger out on her unfairly and goes to apologize (in his own way) and asks her to come back. She accepts.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed: It's no coincidence that he strongly resembles Former President of the United States Theodore Roosevelt as both are burly mustachioed men who love the outdoors and they both like to say 'bully', which was an archaic word for 'good' that was commonly used in Roosevelt's time. (Although TR's political progressivism (his "Square Deal" was the precursor to his cousin FDR's New Deal that created many of the government programs that libertarians like Ron deeply despise) and ebullient personality would likely grate at him)
Not So Above It All: Ron has a goofier, nicer side, just like everyone else. And he loves Li'l Sebastian quite possibly more than anyone.
Obstructive Bureaucrat: He acts as one on purpose in a (thanks to Leslie's hyper-competence) questionably effective attempt to make the government as useless as possible.
Odd Friendship: Ron has this with the entire Parks Department, as well as other people within the government.
With Leslie. Leslie is perky, optimistic, pro-government, and very personable and touchy-feely. Ron is none of those things. Despite this, Leslie is probably Ron's best friend, whether he admits it or not.
In Season 4, he starts to develop more of a friendship with Ann Perkins, helping her learn home repair, asking for her help with a public health project, and getting her advice on dealing with Chris' meditation.
Him and Chris, despite being almost total opposites personality wise, share mutual respect for each other. Chris respects Ron's libertarianism beliefs despite being City Manager and doesn't have an issue with how the Department is run, while Ron builds Chris a crib for his upcoming child with Ann after seeing how stressed it was making him.
With Donna. Ron is tough, gruff, and brutally honest to a fault, while Donna is sassy, hedonistic, and absorbed, but the two have a genuine respect for each other and often at times are on the same wavelength. Most notably, when Ron believes that Donna's ex Joe (who was described as "her Tammy"), Ron is immediately suspicious and protective of her.
In Season 7, Ron actually becomes good friends with Typhoon, a flamboyantly effeminate hairdresser. They bond over a shared hatred of Eurotrash and faddish bicycles (though it's implied that Ron just finds it easy to talk to his barbers). In the finale, Ron is the best man at Typhoon and Craig's wedding.
One-Man Army: Nothing can keep him down.
Only Sane Man: He doesn't get involved in his coworkers' hijinks.
Papa Wolf: While initially unconcerned with Gryzzl's datamining (considering it rather silly to voluntarily give them your personal information and then complain that they have your personal information), the moment his son's privacy (an toddler obviously not using the service) becomes an issue, he goes on the offensive.
In the Season 6 finale at the Pawnee/Eagleton unity concert, he stands protectively in front of his daughters when he realizes Tammy II is in the area.
Parental Substitute: To April and Andy, although April's parents are still around — especially Andy. He helps put Andy through college, offers advice to the young couple, and is their go-to guy (aside from Ben) when they need an "adult's advice". When Ron is unsure of his parenting skills, spending the day with Andy (including taking him to the dentist) is what reassures him.
Patriotic Fervor:
Of course. Here's what he thinks of Canada. Ron especially hates anything resembling Commie Land.
He does, however, actually come to like the Inner Hebrides of Scotland after Leslie sends him there to visit the Lagavulin distillery. He later buys the distillery (or a controlling interest in it, anyway)..
Perpetual Frowner: Even when he's being nice, he's still quite stern. The only thing that makes him smile is the collapse of the Pawnee government.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Leslie, to the point that Diane worries that Ron's so close to Leslie that there'll never be room for another woman in his life, despite Leslie and Ron having no romantic attraction whatsoever.
Pop-Cultural Osmosis Failure: "Is Star Wars the one with the little wizard boy?"
Prefers Proper Names: Ron almost exclusively refers to Andy Dwyer as "Andrew". This corresponds to his refusal to be silly and informal, but also lends a fatherly tone to his interactions with Andy. He also occasionally refers to Ben and Chris as Benjamin and Christopher.
Professional Slacker: He lets Leslie run the department, which she is only too happy to do. Ron, as a fierce super-libertarian, is actually ideologically opposed to the government accomplishing things; the one time he is seen actually working with enthusiasm is when the city needs ideas on how to slash its budget.
Real Men Eat Meat: To the point that he thinks fish are acceptable to catch, but not to eat since "fish meat is practically a vegetable". Although he does consider shrimp his third-favorite food.
Ron is also the inventor of the "Turf and Turf" — a 16-ounce T-bone steak lightly garnished with a 24-ounce Porterhouse.
In one episode, he is seen eating a deep-fried turkey leg wrapped in bacon and guess what's it called? The Swanson.
In another, his response to being offered vegan bacon was to pick it up and immediately put it in the garbage. Followed by requesting another, which he also throws away, and then a third. When questioned why he keeps asking for them if he's only going to throw them away, he responds that it's to save anyone else from eating them.
Real Men Have Short Hair: Ron believes that the only acceptable hairstyles a man or boy can wear are high and tight, crew cuts, and buzz cuts. When put in charge of a boy's basketball team, he makes them follow the "Ron Swanson Pyramid of Greatness" and gives all the boys short-length haircuts.
Real Men Wear Pink: Like the rest of Pawnee, he adores Li'l Sebastian.
Reasonable Authority Figure: An imposing gentleman who is the head of the Parks Department (though in reality leaves 99% of the work to Leslie), but when push comes to shove he sticks up for his coworkers. He's very astute as to where his friends succeed and how to work around their weaknesses when things need to get done. In "Li" he sternly warns Leslie and Ben about their secret relationship that while he isn't against it, he won't be able to help them if it comes out.
Screw the Rules, I Make Them!: Subverted. He tries to pull this while throwing a barbecue in a public park and planning to actually slaughter a pig as part of it, arguing that he is allowed to do this because he is in charge of the Park and Recs department. Unfortunately for his plan, slaughtering and serving a pig also fell under the jurisdiction of other departments such as Health, so he actually didn't make the rules in this case. Notable for being one of the few times he actually tried to exercise his government authority as well, and it turns out to be authority he didn't really have.
Secretly Wealthy: Apparently owns a massive amount of gold and cash. So much so that, according to his attorney, the 5% he plans to leave to his step-daughters and biological son is considered a huge inheritance.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The manly man to Chris' sensitive guy... and basically every other male character in the series (even the not particularly feminine Andy looks less like a man and even more like a little boy when next to Ron).
Ron: I like Andy. I am working in an office all day surrounded by women. And that includes the men.
Shipper on Deck:
He denies it, but in Seasons 2 and 3, he clearly wants April and Andy to get together, to the point of being the one that tells April to stop leading Andy on. (He's quick to assure us that he doesn't care whether they get together, though.)
It's also implied that he's this for Donna and Joe, after seeing Joe's true colors and advising Donna not to mistake drama for happiness.
When he uncovers that Leslie and Ben were secretly seeing each other, he doesn't disapprove of it (though does issue a warning he can't protect them if it comes out) and is more than willing to help out at their wedding.
Sliding Scale of Libertarianism and Authoritarianism: Ron's political philosophy falls quite far on the libertarian side. He has explicitly referred to himself as a libertarian a number of times and sees no value in government-run institutions to the point of wanting everything privatized. Unfortunately for him, Leslie always has ambitious plans to expand the Parks Department. Hilarity Ensues. Of course he also easily changes attitude when people don't comply with his personal philosophies. At a barbecue, he leaves when people complain that he didn't even prepare beverages for children.
So Proud of You: Non-verbally. He mentions that when he feels people are getting too "chummy" with him, he calls them by the wrong name to enforce he doesn't care about them. April compliments his attitude and then refers to him as "Lester". Ron can't help but break a smile.
'Stache of Duty: Ron Swanson is the head of the department who has a mustache. Ron is a self-reliant libertarian who finds great satisfaction in craftsmanship and all other stereotypically manly activities. His mustache style reflects his old-fashioned values and admiration for traditional masculine activities.
Starter Villain: He was initially the Big Bad of Season 7, until he and Leslie reconciled in "Leslie & Ron". After that, Gryzzl itself is the Big Bad.
Stout Strength: For one thing, he took Jamm down with only one punch to the mouth.
Strawman Political: Ron's libertarian views are extreme, to say the least, and are generally used to make him seem unreasonable. That said, it's played with to some extent as he does occasionally make good points in his arguments with Leslie (whose political views are diametrically opposed to his), sometimes acknowledges when he's taking things too far, and is portrayed as having an admirably genuine devotion to his principles.
Sweet Tooth: In an aversion of Real Men Hate Sugar, Ron loves sweets. He enjoys Paunch Burger's sugary sodas, candy from Sweetums, and, when Chris brings a vegetable loaf instead of a cake to April and Andy's party as requested, he's furious.
Ron: [referring to the vegetable loaf] So not only does this thing exist, but now you have deprived everyone of cake!
Team Dad: Begrudgingly. Ron is undeniably a paternal figure to the rest of the office and often acts stern and uninvolved. April and Andy noticeably benefit from his influence, and he becomes a prominent role model for them, though he would fiercely deny such a statement.
Technophobia: Downplayed. This trait usually just manifests itself as a mildly backward streak and when Tom gives him an iPod with all of his jazz records installed onto it, Ron loves it without complaint, and exclaims that "it's an excellent rectangle". On the other hand, he's not happy when technology clashes with his way of life, as best shown when his first reaction when typing in his address into Google Earth is to throw his computer away in a fit of rage (which has more to do with his privacy being violated, rather than a hatred for computers).
Theme Naming: He and his brothers all have names that rhyme: Ron, Don, Lon, Vaughn. He continued the theme with his son: John.
Coincidentally, he has an uncle named Vaughn as well. His mother and both his ex-wives are named Tammy.
'Tis Only a Bullet in the Brain: In "Hunting Trip", one of the characters (Tom) shoots him in the head, but he gets better.
Trademark Favorite Food: Red meat (especially steaks and burgers), breakfast food, and Scotch whiskey. His love of breakfast food is the major thing he and Leslie have in common.
Ron: Why do people ever eat anything besides breakfast food?
Leslie: People are idiots, Ron.
Tsundere: Clearly towards Diane in Season 5. He lets it slip that he loves her to Ann, and when she and Diane's daughters begin to tease him for it, he storms off with a yell of "I LOVE NO ONE!"
Wham Line: In "Leslie and Ron", Ron reveals just how miserable time away from his friends made him.
Ron: I was going to ask you for a job. [Beat] In the federal government.
You Kill It, You Bought It: He intends to leave the bulk of his money to the person or animal that kills him.
Your Approval Fills Me with Shame: His disdain for functioning government is such that when he's once awarded Employee of the Month, he immediate seizes the plaque, cuts it into firewood, burns it all to ash, carries the ashes to another statenote , buries it, covers up any sign he was there, and drives away without a word.