All Girls Like Ponies: According to Amy, she had an awful lot of ponies as a child. When she was de-aged and went back to Mars, a pony can be seen standing to the side in her room. Also explains her devastated reaction when Bender baked her a pony for brunch.
All Girls Want Bad Boys:
Until she hooks up with the sensitive Kif (though in the episode they first get together in, she expresses a distaste for bad boys, instead wanting a good guy).
In "Proposition Infinity" (quite possibly a case of Depending on the Writer as it was after Comedy Central picked up the series), it turns out that Amy still can't keep her eyes off of bad boys or flirting with them. This causes Kif to break up with her and Amy starts a "robosexual" affair with the biggest bad boy she knows, Bender. At the end, Kif shows that he can be 'bad' in his own way to make up with her.
Amicable Exes:
She previously dated Fry, but they remain close friends after breaking up.
With Bender; they dated in "Proposition Infinity" but broke up when Amy insisted on a monogamous marriage. In spite of this, they remain good friends to the point of dancing together during the Dance Party Ending in "The Mutants are Revolting".
Anime Chinese Girl: She's of Chinese descent, but she's from Mars. (Her parents own half of Mars. "The good half", so they claim.)
Asian Airhead: She acts so ditzy that it's easy to forget that she was introduced as a graduate student in applied physics (and eventually gets her PhD).
Asian Rudeness: Amy often accuses Leela of not being ladylike enough to be a true woman. Even so, they remain friends.
Bare Midriffs Are Feminine: She's the more girly of the two female Planet Express employees, and her midriff is rarely not exposed.
Big Eater: Technically a fat version, since she has a bottomless appetite, but ignores it for the most part in order to stay thin. During a "Freaky Friday" Flip episode where she ended up in Leela's body, she gleefully took the opportunity to eat to her heart's content, since it wouldn't be her own body getting fat. By the end of the episode, Leela's body is gigantic. However, seeing Fry and Leela have sex while in Zoidberg and Farnsworth's bodies kills her appetite for good.
Birds of a Feather: Part of the reason she and Fry hooked up was because they shared similar interests, both being ditzy and rebellious. And unlike Leela, Fry's childish behavior wasn't a turn-off for Amy.
Book Smart: It's more evident in later seasons. She's still a ditz, but an academically competent ditz with a PhD.
Brainless Beauty: She is a very cute girl but, despite her usual intelligence, she can be absent-minded. Especially in Season 2. A notable example being removing Dr. Zoidberg's restraints no less than eight times, despite injuries she endured each time.
Amy: Fool me seven times, shame on you, fool me eight or more times, shame on me.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: Amy's own parents don't really treat her with respect and constantly nags her for grandkids. Contrast that with her absolute love for her children with Kif, even if it is hard work raising them and they aren't biologically hers.
But Not Too Bi: Although she claims to be bisexual as of "The Numberland Gap", the only evidence we've seen of this so far is a kiss between her and Leela in Bender's Game (with the context that reality is being heavily influenced by Bender's imagination at the time), compared to her extensive history with men, male aliens and man-bots and her longterm relationship with Kif.
Casual Kink: With Earth facing impending death (again), Amy suggested an end-of-the-world orgy. The rest of the crew quickly lost interest, though not before Amy got changed.
Character Development:
In early seasons Amy was mostly The Ditz, and the fact that she was also Farnsworth's intern and an intellectual was essentially an Informed Attribute, only mentioned in her introduction and in Mars University. In the Comedy Central seasons, Amy gets significantly more focus to highlight the fact that yes, she is a scientist and Farnsworth's assistant.
While she's reluctant to give up her party girl lifestyle to be a mother in "Kif Gets Knocked Up a Notch," she accepts by the end of the episode out of love for Kif. When the children emerge from the swamp twenty years later in "Children of a Lesser Bog", Amy becomes fully invested in being a parent and latches onto her babies immediately, indicating she's greatly matured over the years and is more willing to settle down.
Characterization Marches On: Her clumsiness used to be a prominent trait, but got downplayed in favor of focusing on her ditziness as the series went on.
Cleavage Window: She and Leela have some outfits with this. In one episode that had random time skips during a basketball game, Amy, wearing such an outfit, immediately brings attention to it as a possible explanation.
Continuity Snarl: In "The Series Has Landed", Amy said she belonged to the sorority "Kappa Kappa Wong", but in "A Farewell to Arms", she was a member of Sigma Beta, having gone to the same as the choosing mechanism.
Cute Clumsy Girl: Frequently falls over. In one episode Fry refers to her as "a klutz from Mars".
The Cutie: She states that she had cuteness reduction surgery on her cheek and nose when she was a teenager because she used to be too cute.
Dating What Daddy Hates: Her parents don't like Kif. (The fact that they set her up with Kif in the first place raises a few questions, like whether they mainly care about status given that they thought he was the captain of the ship they were on at the time, or whether they simply hate anyone Amy goes out with by default, causing them to turn on Kif after their matchmaking actually worked.) They also disapproved of Amy's brief relationship with Bender to the point of attempting to forcibly split them up, seemingly because they disapproved of robosexual relationships.
Mr. Wong: This your boyfriend? I have instant dislike of him!
Mrs. Wong: He too scrawny to father grandchildren.
Amy: He's not scrawny, he's just small-boned.
Kif: Actually, I don't have bones. I'm supported by a system of fluid-filled bladders that—
Mr. Wong: Yes, yes! You a big squishy wuss! Amy should be dating real man.
Distaff Counterpart: To Fry, as she's carefree, ditzy, clumsy, and prone to Comically Missing the Point (although she's more Book Smart than him). Their similarities are brought up in the episode where they date.
The Ditz: A black-haired Ditz (to the point of becoming Birds of a Feather with Fry in "Put Your Head on My Shoulders"), she fails at haggling, confusing it with bidding at auctions, and flirts with all men. Bordering on Genius Ditz, since she's also an engineering student (though in one DVD commentary, the writers admitted that they'd completely forgotten that). Only after the return of the show post-cancellation, she began to be portrayed more as a Ditzy Genius.
Ditzy Genius: In later seasons, the series actually starts using her in plots involving her as an academic or scientist on top of plots involving her as a ditz. Even more so, now that she's finished college and obtained a doctorate. An example of this trope is the episode "Viva Mars Vegas" when she comes up with an elaborate plan for the gang but also shows her clueless Upper-Class Twit side ("What's rent?").
Dude Magnet: She's every bit as attractive as Leela is, and doesn't have the Cyclops problem to go with it. It's all but directly stated before she settled down with Kif that she was very sexually active, and even then she still has sex with Fry, Bender, and Zapp during the course of the series.
Dumbass No More: She has most of her dumb moments in early seasons, and in season 2 she's a borderline Brainless Beauty (all her Too Dumb to Live moments listed below are in season 2, and the same season also has a Pair the Dumb Ones episode about her and Fry), while her role as Farnsworth's intern was merely an Informed Attribute. She becomes less clueless after she starts dating Kif, and after getting a Doctorate degree in season 6, she's a full-on Ditzy Genius.
Embarrassing Old Photo: Her 2997 Employee of the Year photo. Not only is she fat in that photo, it makes her hungry just looking at it.
Expository Hairstyle Change: Played with — when she's first seen during the Introdump at the very beginning of Bender's Big Score, she had grown her hair longer, but Bender almost immediately burps fire, burning her hair to its more familiar style.
Extreme Omnisexual: She's apparently bisexual and has dated humans, aliens and robots.
Foil: She's often used to highlight Leela's romantic failures and tomboyish nature by comparison. She's more feminine and carefree and has lower standards for men, while Leela is an Action Girl who is quite picky, but also quite lonely, and sometimes resents Amy for how easily she finds dates.
Foreign-Language Tirade: She'll often curse in Cantonese whenever she's angry. Since her voice actress actually speaks it, it's authentic too.
Formerly Fat: She was very fat as a child; even her parents tease her mercilessly about it. In one episode, the main characters all revert to their childhood forms, and Amy, again overweight, becomes the butt of all her dads' childish jokes.
Leo Wong: 'Stay in room'? You so fat, you gonna stay all around room.
Future Slang: She is the most likely character to use this. The words she uses are mainly taking everyday words and changing the first letter, like variations of "duh", such as "guh", "spluh", "fluh", "buh" and "stuh". She also uses words like "gloviously" and "sploops".
Girly Girl with a Tomboy Streak: Amy is a spoiled and girly party girl, but she "works" as an engineering intern, has short hair, and always wears a tracksuit.
Fry: Hey, tell me something: You've got all this money, how come you always dress like you're doing your laundry?
Amy: I guess 'cause my parents keep telling me to be more ladylike.
Good Bad Girl: Not only is she open to dating non-humans, but in some episodes, dates creatures that aren't even humanoid. She freely brags about her "general sluttiness" quite often.
Gratuitous Foreign Language: Amy often speaks Cantonese, especially when angry. They're mostly insults.
If It's You, It's Okay: Usually not robosexual, but has a fling with Bender in Proposition Infinity.
Informed Flaw: According to Fry and her father Leo, she has a chunky backside. Implied to be leftover from when she was overweight. We the audience can't really make this out, even when she's wearing her raunchier outfits.
Innocently Insensitive: Despite her friendly demeanor, she tends to make condescending comments towards her friends, even if she intends it to sound like a genuine compliment. Leela's usually the recipient, as most of Amy's compliments end up passive-aggressively insulting Leela's femininity, and it's not always clear if she's being passive-aggressive or just ditzy. In "Leela's Homeworld," she remarks to Leela, who just won Orphan of the Year, "Your parents must be so proud!" and then immediately apologizes when she realizes her error.
Interspecies Romance: With Kif; they're a human/alien couple.
The Klutz: Frequently falls over. In one episode Fry refers to her as "a klutz from Mars". She falls right after he says it.
Limited Wardrobe: Amy zigzags the trope. Despite having boatloads of cash from her parents to purchase any outfit she could want, Amy almost always wears the same pink tracksuit (except for formal events). When Fry points this out, she says it's because she's rebelling against her parents. However she seems to have a large variety of outfits for special occasions and parties. She even wore an outfit modeled after Jackie Onassis Kennedy in "Hell is Other Robots".
Ms. Fanservice: Aside from her regular pink tracksuit outfit, she wears very skimpy outfits for every formal event (even a funeral◊) and often appears in a bikini and, sometimes, naked to the point of being a Shameless Fanservice Girl in contrast to Leela.
Nice Girl: While sometimes inconsiderate and selfish, Amy is usually depicted as a friendly (if ditzy) girl.
Official Couple: With Kif. They have a more stable relationship than pretty much any other couple in the show. Contrast to the on-again off-again relationship of Fry and Leela.
Older Than They Look: By Season 7, Amy is 34, but looks exactly the same as she did in Season 1, when she was 21. This seems to be normal in the 31st century as we see people well into their hundreds looking like they're only 70.
Pair the Dumb Ones: One episode focuses on the ditzy Amy dating Fry, and how easily they bond because of their similarities. He dumps her at the end of the episode though.
Pink Is Erotic: Amy Wong is openly promiscuous and a source of fanservice for the show. She wears pink clothes, has a pink bed and has a pink bedside table.
Pink Means Feminine: Zig-zagged. She's the girly girl to Leela's tomboy, and her default outfit is pink — but it's a tracksuit, not something feminine.
The Pirates Who Don't Do Anything: She's an intern at Planet Express, but is never seen to do actual work there. The second episode says that Professor Farnsworth keeps her around because she has the same blood type as him. She's still shown assisting Fry, Leela, and Bender on deliveries at times and will occasionally pilot the ship in Leela's absence. The episode "That Darn Katz!" lampshades this when the Professor says she was ready to get her doctorate twelve years ago but forgot to mention it.
Proud Beauty: She's very proud of her pretty appearance and describes herself as The Cutie.
Really Gets Around: During the early days of the show, Amy was sleeping around like crazy. Not only was she open to dating non-humans, but in some episodes, dates creatures that aren't even humanoid. This presumably comes to an end once she gets together with Kif, but Amy's shown to still do some harmless flirting with other guys to Kif's chagrin.
Robosexual: Temporarily hooks up with Bender in "Proposition Infinity," leading to backlash from her parents who want her to date a human man.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: The perky and ditzy Energetic Girl to Kif's shy and serious Savvy Guy.
Second Episode Introduction: Introduced in the second episode, along with the other supporting Planet Express members (Zoidberg and Hermes).
Shameless Fanservice Girl: Amy has no qualms showing off her body and whenever she's wearing something other than her pink tracksuit, expect it to show her cleavage and a lot of skin.
Ship Tease: With Bender, in addition to the aforementioned Robosexual episode, they've been shown to have very good chemistry. Some of the alternative universes we see over the course of the series even have them as a couple.
Smarter Than You Look: As the episode "That Darn Katz" reminds us, she is an engineering graduate student who designs a machine to harness the rotational energy of the Earth. Also, she officially gains her doctorate at the end of the episode, so she is the ultimate Ditzy Genius.
Spoiled Sweet: Her parents own a hemisphere of Mars, but despite this, she's actually pretty nice (if a little inconsiderate and selfish at times).
Strange Minds Think Alike: "Put Your Head On My Shoulders" shows how good she can relate to Fry's odd behavior with family matters. They both later decide to end their relationship due to Fry feeling Amy is "suffocating" him.
Stripperiffic: Pretty much anything she wears outside of her normal outfit shows a ton of skin.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: Girly Girl to Leela's Tomboy. Early designs for Amy had her be much more masculine. This was changed so the women would contrast each other.
Too Dumb to Live: Zoidberg (maddened by a mating frenzy) manages to trick her into freeing him several times in "Why Must I Be a Crustacean In Love?" (and he does it one more time before the scene ends), and a robotic food disposal almost chops off her hand in "Mother's Day" by offering her a diamond ring in the drain until the others stop her. In both scenes someone calls her a 'moron' (Bender in the former, Prof. Farnsworth in the latter).
Totally Radical: A 30th century version. She's the youngest adult main character and uses semi-current slang with science-fictiony add-ons. (For example, shmeesh=yeesh, splech=yech, guh=duh, etc.)
Upper-Class Twit: A ditzy, spoiled rich girl who often seems genuinely unaware of poor people problems (like not knowing what "rent" is).
Valley Girl: Although a milder case than most. Wealthy family, loves shopping, and even uses a sci-fi-twisted version of the lingo ("guh" and "spluh" are favorites of hers).
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Leela. Amy frequently insults Leela at the drop of a hat, but still goes out for drinks with her (although she'll still abandon Leela to go off for "coffee" with guys), and invites Leela to her wedding. In a deleted scene for "Kif Gets Knocked Up a Notch", Amy says she sees Leela as an older sister. It's lampshaded in "The Butterjunk Effect" when she and Leela explain that passive-aggressive insults are just how girl friends communicate.
"Well Done, Daughter!" Gal: Sort of. In "Into the Wild Green Yonder", she reveals that she has been trying to fill the void of her father wanting a son by acting more masculine (her choice of clothing, as opposed to something more feminine, for instance).
Working with the Ex: She and Fry date for a very brief while until he breaks up with her, feeling she's "smothering" him. The same is true with her and Bender, who dumps her (again, after a brief liaison) upon the revelation that she assumed they'd be in a monogamous relationship.
Wrench Wench: An engineering intern. Not that she actually does anything.