Adult Adoptee: He's adopted by Leela's parents in Season 10, despite being at least as old as the Professor.
An Alien Named "Bob": His first name is John, although he's more typically referred to by his last name. This is apparently normal in Decapodian culture, as other individuals of his species have names like Edna, Harold, Norman, and Judith.
Aliens Love Human Food: Dr. Zoidberg and his species (the Decapodians) became infatuated with Earth food upon arriving on the planet, especially anchovies, which eventually leads to the extinction of said species after the Decapodians eat them out of existence. Zoidberg himself appears to have an addiction to the fish and upon trying a few he displays the telltale behavior of a drug addict going into withdrawal.
Ambiguously Bi: He didn't seem to mind when he thought President Truman was coming onto him in "Roswell That Ends Well". Later in "Beast With A Billion Backs" he seems rather...interested when describing men thrusting their sweaty naked bodies against slices of delicious cake. On the other hand, he seems a bit disturbed by Barbados Slim's attraction to him (although that episode is Non-Canon) and "Stench and Stenchibility" shows he has an attraction to females. Of course, Zoidberg does have difficulty telling the difference between male and female humans.
Ambiguously Jewish: He fulfills many, many Jewish stereotypes but is never exactly confirmed as being Jewish himself.
Amusing Alien: A lobster-esque alien who is very goofy, pathetic and most of what he does is played for laughs.
Animal Motifs: Not only does he heavily resemble a lobster, but he's also constantly referred to as one. He's been subject to lobster related jokes, such as having rubber bands fitted over his claws and Fry attacking him with a lobster cracker during a duel on his home planet.
Attention Whore: The desperate Butt-Monkey version of this.
Zoidberg: Hooray! People are paying attention to me!
Back-Alley Doctor: His medical credentials are questionable at best, and he regularly shows gross ignorance about human biology. His connections with the Professor are the only reason he has a position as the staff doctor, and the crew suffers for it regularly.
Berserk Button:
Zoidberg does the cutting, and you better not forget it!
Also, don't cross him. Zoidberg is relentlessly loyal, but betray him and he'll cut you.
Zoidberg: You're lucky to have Zoidberg as a friend. But cross me, and I'll turn on you like that!
Don't steal his jokes, either.
Beware the Nice Ones: Zoidberg is nice, albeit a bit clingy and desperate for approval. However, with enough stimulation or rage, he's strong enough to cut through metal with his pincers and lift the heaviest of weights (combined with Fry and Amy's weight). The crew is terrified when he finds out they ate the last of the anchovies and screams in horror when Zoidberg escapes his restraints.
Beware the Silly Ones: He rivals Fry in this department. When angered, Zoidberg shows how dangerous a starving lobster monster can be when his claws can cut through metal or bone with no effort.
Big Eater: Whenever he's not rummaging through garbage cans. He destroys an entire buffet table in "Roswell That Ends Well"
Bizarre Alien Biology: He has ink glands, an "empathy bladder", two tongues (one of which is a secondary mouth not unlike a xenomorph's), prehensile mouth flaps, a mating crest that also pops up when he's sufficiently angry, and several sets of redundant organs, including three hearts (originally four, but one was removed), two stomachs (one for freshwater and one for saltwater), and a tiny secondary brain in his rump that dictates his behavior during mating season. He grows barnacles like humans get acne, and his armpits can extrude wormlike tentacles for no obvious reason. He can put on and take off his shell at will, but also has to molt occasionally, and he went through close to a dozen stages of growth in the episode "Teenage Mutant Leela's Hurdles", including a stage where he somehow turned into a hunk of coral. Finally, he has a gland that releases a foul stench when he's bored or in heat, he coughs up blue pearls when he eats too much dirt, and he can grow hair that instantly turns white when under extreme duress.
Borscht Belt: As part of his role as a Space Jew, he's also a classic Borscht Belt-style comedy character. His voice actor Billy West describes his voice and many of his mannerisms as being inspired by such comedians, and his desperately impoverished and pathetic nature derives from the schnorrer archetype of Jewish comedy.
Breakout Character: Although the least relevant of the Planet Express crew and receiving little if any development in the original run, Zoidberg ended up rivaling Bender, the intended target of this trope, as one of the most beloved characters of the series. As a result, he's had several plot important roles in several episodes of the Comedy Central era.
Bumbling Sidekick: Any instance where he's actually accompanying the crew on a mission, his clumsy and/or moronic nature will make it rare for him to contribute to solving the problem.
Butt-Monkey: The most common recipient of the trope. In "Bender Gets Made", Leela crashes the Planet Express ship through the roof. Hermes turns to Zoidberg and promptly docks his pay.
Career Not Taken: On several occasions, Zoidberg has expressed a desire to be a vaudeville performer and comedian instead of a doctor. In fact, his doctorate is in art history. Flashbacks show he was pressured into being a doctor by his family, though they also guilt-tripped him for "giving up on his dream" when he did become a doctor. He does occasionally get involved in the arts, but it usually doesn't work out for him (though neither does being a doctor).
Catchphrase:
WOOP WOOP WOOP!
When upset, Zoidberg tends to let loose a dramatic sob.
Cloudcuckoolander: Zoidberg is neck and neck in the running with Fry when it comes to this trope. Which makes sense, what with him being the token alien and Fry having a unique form of brain damage.
Cosmic Plaything: Nearly nothing goes right for him, including somehow being on the wrong side of the laws of physics, which sets his tangled slinky on fire and burning down his underwater house.
Crippling Overspecialization:
When it comes to medicine and surgery, Zoidberg is actually brilliant... as long as he's operating on aliens or dealing with alien diseases. Unfortunately, since he's on Earth and surrounded by humans, all that knowledge is nearly useless and thus he often does more harm than good.
In "The Duh-Vinci Code", he gets to use his doctorate for once. However, that doctorate is in art history...
It's implied he suffered some brain damage when he was younger from a Tritonian Yeti nearly biting through his skull; prior to that, his comments were completely rational, and afterwards he forgets what he said and is less coherent.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass:
When he's sufficiently angered, he is capable of kicking serious ass. Isn't that right, Clamps?
The first season alone gives Zoidberg a few moments of awesome, managing to plug a hole in a door, keeping the gang safe from the angry Trisolians, or managing to hold a heavy bulkhead door open with one claw.
Cthulhumanoid: Though his mouth parts are smaller than those of most Cthulhumanoids in fiction.
Cumbersome Claws: Zoidberg has a tendency to be rather clumsy at times with his claws. A notable example in "The 30% Iron Chef" where he accidentally snaps the Professor's bottled ship in two and fails to fix it due to his claws exerting so much force.
Professor: [after swatting Zoidberg away from the bottle] For the last time, Zoidberg! Look with your eyes, not your claws!
Depending on the Writer: How aware Zoidberg seems to be of how much everyone hates him varies. Sometimes he seems pretty aware, other times he seems completely oblivious. Other times, he's grossly ignorant of any details about the others. Also, how much the fact everyone hates him bothers him varies between genuinely upsetting for him to something he's totally apathetic towards to outright agreeing with everyone that he's gross and annoying.
Desperately Craves Affection: No one really cares about him and is always desperate for friendship and attention. 
Early Installment Character-Design Difference: He had teeth in the earliest episodes of first season, but he's entirely toothless in all other episodes. Notably averted in the comics, where he retained this trait.
Expy: While Fry and Bender take after Homer's laziness and love of beer, Zoidberg inherits Homer's traits of being incompetent, bald, overweight and a Big Eater.
Extreme Omnivore: Eats just about anything that will fit in his mouth, including a very moldy sandwich and golf balls (which he thinks are "gritty, tasteless eggs"). According to a DVD extra that answered questions from the viewers to the creators, there are only three things he won't eat, brown crayons, compact florescent bulbs and tofu.
First-Name Basis: Nowadays everyone calls him by his last name, but he was quite popular with the first Planet Express crew who called him by his first name. In a Friendship Moment at the end of "The Tip of the Zoidberg", the Professor calls him "Johnny". This also happens when Carol is talking to Johnny and vice-versa.
Fish People: As a Decapodian, he's an aquatic alien who resembles various sea animals of Earth (most obviously crustaceans and cephalopods).
Flanderization: His original schtick was that he was a genuinely competent alien doctor that simply knew nothing about human anatomy. The later episodes have him as a poor, disgusting, incompetent mooch who serves as the show's walking punchline. The writers do attempt to rectify this in "The Tip of the Zoidberg", showing he's an expert in pretty much all forms of xenobiology ... except humans.
Formerly Fit: According to the flashbacks in "The Tip of the Zoidberg" he used to be quite slim.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He works for Planet Express but all of his co-workers hate him, though he's mostly oblivious to it. Fry, Professor Farnsworth, and (to an extent) Leela are usually the only ones to refer to Zoidberg as a friend. He says that the only reason his co-workers keep him around is because he can cut things.
Funny Foreigner: His species are a common immigrant group on Earth with obvious Ashkenazi resonances.
Genius Ditz: Despite being an incompetent doctor who knows absolutely nothing about human anatomy, we later find out that he IS a doctor — of Art History. What's more impressive is that there were a couple of occasions where Zoidberg actually performed operations successfully. Impressive, considering he doesn't actually have any medical training. He may not know anything about human anatomy, but he is a terrific alien doctor.
Gonk: You'd never know from the art style, but everyone treats Zoidberg as unbearably hideous, and not just because he's a humanoid lobster-creature. Apparently even by Decapodian standards he's not great to look at.
Happily Adopted: In season 10, after living with them for a few months, Leela's parents legally adopt him. While their overbearingness annoys him enough to move back to his dumpster, he still proudly hangs up a photo of himself and the Turangas (who do the same in their home).
Hates Common Food: Played with when Zoidberg has received $300 and is trying to live the life of a rich person. He orders a very expensive meal of caviar and foie gras, and is repulsed that what he receives is eggs and liver, likening it to the same kinds of things he ate out of the trash when he was poor, rather than getting a fancy meal of goose and fish like what he expected rich people to eat.
Zoidberg: Goose liver? Fish eggs? Pah! Where's the goose? Where's the fish?
Elzar: Hey, that's what rich people eat. The garbage parts of the food.
Hidden Depths: While it was mostly because the episode involved multiple accounts of Throw the Dog a Bone in regards to him, he's one of the extremely few beings on Earth that is on Robot Santa's Nice List (if not the only one).
High Hopes, Zero Talent: Zoidberg's greatest desire is to be a stand-up comedian, but he's absolutely terrible at it. His uncle bluntly tells him he's talentless and unfunny, but by the Comedy Central seasons he seems to have gotten better, performing a moderately successful ventriloquist act.
Honor Before Reason: As shown in the episode "The Tip of the Zoidberg", Zoidberg was a promising exobiologist working for Mom and could have lived a life of comfort had he stayed on her payroll. Instead, in return for the Professor saving his life from a yeti, Zoidberg decided to stay with him and euthanize him in the event he contracts Hyper Malaria (or cure him if he turns into a Yeti), making him the poverty-stricken human physician he is today.
I Just Want to Have Friends:
He cares more about friends than money or fame, as seen in "The Tip of the Zoidberg", where he remains with the Professor, his friend, instead of staying working for Mom, which could have made him rich. His decision to remain with Farnsworth costs him a life of wealth. He doesn't seem to care (or at least, he doesn't realize his decision threw him into poverty), although he does cry from time to time over being poor.
One episode has him spell this out explicitly. After having a bag of mob money dropped in his dumpster, he takes off to Mars Vegas (where the rest of the Planet Express crew are vacationing), sits down at the roulette table and bets his entire pot... and wins... then bets everything again and wins again (coming out to over $10,000,000,000; he started with $8,000,000) in an astonishing swing of good luck. He buys drinks for everyone, they all cheer, he sets up another spin... and loses it all in one shot. Amy admonishes his behavior, to which he responds that he's okay with it and was satisfied to make everyone around him happy, if even for a brief moment. Then he calmly stands up and walks out of the casino with dignity.
"300 Big Boys" demonstrates this too. Zoidberg wants to spend his 300 dollar tax refund on rich guy stuff, but nothing rich people like seems to actually appeal to him. In the end, he uses it to buy a hot dog feast for a bunch of homeless people.
In Touch with His Feminine Side: He's the most sensitive member of the Planet Express crew as he is very emotional. He also enjoys knitting and painting and owned a make-up kit in one episode. Apparently his greatest fantasy is to be a grandmother.
Innocent Aliens: He thinks most doctors are poor.
Interspecies Adoption: As of Season 10's "Crab Splatter", he's Leela's adopted brother, making him a Decapodian in a family of mutant humans.
Jerkass Ball: He comes off as pretty friendly, for the most part, but he feeds off nasty things (in fact, in the video game, it is implied that he has eaten humans) and has done deplorable things: framing Fry for breaking the Professor's bottle, or severing Fry's right arm in a fight over a female of his species. Subverted, when he immediately felt guilty and tried to kill himself over the former, and apologized and made up for the latter.
Kick the Dog: When he severs Fry's right arm in a fight over a female of his species. To be fair, though, he wasn't in his right mind at the time. After several failed attempts, he did fix the arm.
Last-Name Basis: Doctor John A. Zoidberg, known simply as Zoidberg. In the early seasons his first name John is almost never mentioned, but in the Comedy Central episodes he's referred to as John Zoidberg much more frequently.
Lethally Stupid: It's implied that he's killed many of his patients due to incompetence.
Let's Get Dangerous!: Kicks Clamps' ass in Silence of the Clamps after he threatens his job at Planet Express and is about to clamp Bender or who they thought was Bender. And as previously mentioned, saving the Professor's life in "The Tip of the Zoidberg".
Mad Libs Catchphrase: Sometimes, particularly in his later appearances, when involved in something everyone else is (even life-threatening scenarios), he will exclaim "Hooray! I'm [X] with friends!"
The Millstone: To the Planet Express crew. He is the company's doctor, but a terrible Lethally Stupid doctor with no clue about how human anatomy works.
Money Dumb: A Running Gag is that Dr. Zoidberg's Perpetual Poverty at least partly stems from him being terrible with money. For example, impulsively buying several records he sees on an infomercial (and doing the same with a late edition newspaper from a street vendor later in the same episode). Despite the fact they're records by Fry, and he could have presumably got them for free by asking.
Morality Pet:
To Mom, of all people. Zoidberg is the only person she treats with genuine respect, heck they even address each other by first names and she has offered to give him his own fully staffed laboratory.
He's also this to Robot Santa who tries to kill everyone for being naughty, except Zoidberg, who has been very good and gets a pogo stick. Seems that Zoidberg's lot in life is to be treated as a Butt-Monkey by everyone except those who already treat everyone else as a Butt-Monkey.
Multiple-Choice Past: The reason for his lack of medical knowledge changes depending on the joke and the episode. Sometimes it's brain damage, sometimes he's an expert on alien anatomy and unfamiliar with human anatomy, sometimes he's Not That Kind of Doctor and his doctorate is Art History, sometimes he's had no medical training whatsoever and his only knowledge is whatever he remembers from posters in the doctor's office and medication ads.
Mundane Luxury: Given the way he lives, the simplest of things can easily be the most amazing of triumphs.
Zoidberg: What's this? Two meals in one week?
Zoidberg: A floor? We live like kings!
My Friends... and Zoidberg: Trope Namer, where Zoidberg gets specifically excluded from a friends group. It has somehow helped him in at least one case (Robot Santa seems to consider him morally upright, despite participating in several of the gang's antics that he doesn't overlook for anyone else).
Nice Guy: Despite his odd habits and lack of knowledge about human anatomy, Zoidberg is one of the show's nicest and most moral characters. It's been shown he's willing to sacrifice his own happiness on multiple occasions to help others. He gives up a potentially luxurious life for Farnsworth, a loving relationship with a woman in order to give her a sense of smell (although in that case, it actually works out because she finds his repugnant odor to be attractive), and a literal fortune in order to show people a good time. Not only that but he'll risk life and limb for his friends, such as backstabbing a murderous robot Santa Claus and saving Professor Farnsworth from a yeti. Not only that but Zoidberg is perhaps the only person on Earth who meets said Robot Santa's impossibly high standards for good behavior (EVEN AFTER BETRAYING HIM, although it could be argued that Santa saw it as him being loyal).
No Celebrities Were Harmed: His voice was based on what Billy West called "marble-mouthed" Borscht Belt comedians such as George Jessel and Mort Sahl.
Not That Kind of Doctor: In "The Duh-Vinci Code", it turns out that Zoidberg's doctorate is in art history... Though it was later established he's one of the best doctors around when it comes to alien anatomy.
Oblivious to Hatred: Sometimes he's oblivious about his The Friend Nobody Likes status, and thinks all his co-workers are his close friends. In "The Six Million Dollar Mon" he's genuinely shocked when Hermes tells him he's not his friend, even if Hermes openly hates Zoidberg more than anyone and is always verbal about it.
Older Than They Look: Though it would be hard to guess how old he looks (he is a crab like alien after all) he's known the Professor since 2927, putting him somewhere past his late 80s.
One-Winged Angel: Implied. Zoidberg is easily browbeaten and appears to be a bit of a weakling. However, when he's angry, horny, or in a vulnerable position, a fin strikes upwards and resembles a mohawk. During this state, he's strong enough to cut metal as he cuts off Clamp's clamps and outmuscles the entire Planet Express crew.
Other Me Annoys Me: As seen in "The Farnsworth Parabox", even Zoidberg looks down on Zoidberg.
Overshadowed by Awesome: "The Cryonic Woman" shows that part of Zoidberg's lack of popularity at Planet Express is because of the presence of the much cooler Fry, Bender and Leela. When they're fired, he immediately becomes more popular.
Perpetual Poverty: Always poor, hungry, and lonely. Something of a Characterization Marches On, as he was none of these things in the first season.
The Pig-Pen: What with living in dumpsters and everything. And as further proof even Zoidberg can't catch a break, Decapodians consider foul stenches attractive, and he can't even manage that.
Poverty for Comedy: Being a bad doctor and an even less wanted friend, he lives in a dumpster and subsists on garbage and whatever else he can find.
Quack Doctor: Zigzagged. He claims to be an expert on humans but is clearly not. However, he is not conning; he truly thinks he knows about human anatomy, but he doesn't. As for whether or not he's a real doctor, that varies. In one episode, he claims he lost his medical degree in a volcano but might have been lying. In another, it's revealed that he's Not That Kind of Doctor but another episode suggests that he's good at doctoring various species, just not humans.
Really 700 Years Old: His multiple life-stages suggest he could be near/in the Professor's age group, if not somewhat older.
Red Live Lobster: Dr Zoidberg is a humanoid lobster alien. He and his species are red in colour.
Retcon: "Insane in the Mainframe" says Zoidberg's only been at Planet Express for ten years by that point. The Comedy Central seasons establish him as having been there for decades.
Second Episode Introduction: Introduced in the second episode, along with the other supporting Planet Express members (Hermes and Amy).
Secret-Keeper: The real reason he stays around Planet Express is to keep watch on Professor Farnsworth, and euthanize him when he finally shows symptoms of Hyper Malaria.
Shout-Out:
His name is a reference to a rejected Apple II game that David X. Cohen developed in high school called Zoid. (Supposedly, it was a lot like Qix).
The concept of his character is a reversal of Bones McCoy, a human doctor who often worked on alien creatures such as Spock.
Smart Ball:
Pointed out in "Parasites Lost" when he gets a fact about human anatomy right. He got it off a decongestant commercial. Moments later, he's back on form, mistaking the heart and stomach.
"The Six Million Dollar Mon" has him manage to reason out that if he holds on to all of Hermes' body parts that he throws away as he gets them replaced with robotic ones, he can put Hermes back together again. This ends up succeeding mostly without a hitch (though Hermes has noted on-screen that Zoidberg has yet to attach his nerve endings) in spite of how Zoidberg is supposed to be entirely unaware of human anatomy.
He also managed to successfully attach Fry's head to Amy's body to save the former's life in Season 2's "Put Your Head on My Shoulders". Pretty impressive for a guy who's normally supposed to be woefully inept with any human-related medical issues. Same goes with him performing a surgery to give his human girlfriend a sense of smell in "Stench and Stenchibility".
Space Jews: Played for laughs. Oy vey! This is also why his species are crustaceans — they're not kosher.
Straw Loser: He actually makes Fry look cool in comparison. While Fry is also considered a loser, at least he doesn't live in a dumpster or eat garbage, has plenty of women over the show's run (including Leela, Amy, his own grandmother, a radiator...), and despite being often the butt of the other's jokes, is actually liked by most people.
Territorial Comic Relief: In "War is the H-Word", Dr. Zoidberg is recruited as a medic for the soldiers on Spheron-1. He tries to be a glib, funny doctor, only to be constantly upstaged by iHawk, a more capable and charismatic doctor:
Nurse: Are you ready to operate, doctor?
iHawk: I'd love to, but first I have to perform surgery.
Zoidberg: That's my joke! I'll Kill You!
Third-Person Person: Occasionally, Zoidberg has the tendency to refer to himself in the third person, usually when gloating about something idiotic.
Three Stooges Shout-Out: He borrows some of Curly Howard's mannerisms, most famously the "WOOP WOOP WOOP!" schtick (although he also occasionally does the "Nyuk nyuk nyuk" and "Nyaaaaaahhhhhhh!" thing).
Throw the Dog a Bone:
He's the only one Robot Santa genuinely cares about, to the point where he gets a pogo stick for not being on the naughty list.
In "Spanish Fry", Leela actually offers him a chance to tag along on the episode's adventure. Zoidberg casually declines.
In the second-to-last episode of Season 7, Zoidberg gets a love interest who isn't seen off by Status Quo Is God at the end of the episode.
Back in the day, the crew that worked for the Professor (under the leadership of Captain Tucker) loved Zoidberg.
In Season 10, he's adopted by Leela's parents, who wholeheartedly adore him as much as they do Leela, making him a member of the Turanga family.
Token Good Teammate: In "Xmas Story" he was specifically the only member of the Planet Express crew (and apparently on Earth) who is not on Santa's naughty/target list.
Token Non-Human: He's the only crew member to be fully alien, which creates conflict when he has to serve as a doctor to his human/humanoid co-workers while knowing nothing about human anatomy.
Too Hungry to Be Polite: He tends to eat very messily, although it does make sense considering he only gets one or two meals a week.
Took a Level in Badass: Zoidberg seems to have become more competent after the show moved to Comedy Central.
Tragic Dream: Wanted to become a comedian, but his own mother and even his uncle who is a famous comedy actor tells him he's terrible at it.
Undying Loyalty: Has become an important trait in the Comedy Central seasons. In "The Tip of the Zoidberg", we see that the Professor was the first friend he ever had, and he swore never to leave his side partly to help euthanize the Professor when his Hyper-Malaria flares up. In "The Six Million Dollar Mon", he holds onto Hermes' discarded body parts and restores him to normal when he starts losing his humanity, all because he thinks Hermes is a good friend (when in reality Hermes can't stand him).
"Zoidberg never abandons a friend, apparently!"
Ultimate Job Security: His friendship with Farnsworth ensures continued employment despite how utterly incompetent he is.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Despite the others's treatment of him, he likes to see everyone as his best friend (thinking he and Hermes are close friends, calling Fry his "dearest friend"note , calling Bender his "best friend", etc.) How much this is reciprocated depends on the episode; Bender and Hermes just flat-out hate Zoidberg and the others are not too fond of him but they can tolerate him at times or even treat him like a friend (like the Professor in "The Tip of the Zoidberg"). In the episode "Silence of the Clamps" he states that the only reason the crew keeps him around is because he can cut things.