Acrofatic: Despite his big build, he's incredibly agile and is able to do some incredible limboing, even in retirement.
Always Someone Better: Barbados Slim, his former professional limbo rival, and La Barbara's ex-husband.
Hermes: [depressed] Everybody loves Slim! He is the only person to have won Olympic medals in both Limboing and Sex!
Anything but That!: As a dedicated bureaucrat, paid vacation is "the ultimate penalty" to him.
Badass Bureaucrat:
In one episode he convinces a forced labor camp to let him go by organizing them so efficiently all the work can be done by one Australian man. Then he organizes a massive pile of tube cylinders. To a beat.
In Bender's Big Score, after plugging his brain into the fleet battle-computer, Hermes uses Awesomeness by Analysis to utterly annihilate the Scammers defenses in a matter of minutes.
Butt-Monkey: He's the character most likely to receive the short-end of the stick when Zoidberg isn't available.
Catchphrase:
"My Manwich!" Usually provoked by Bender's antics. And his son's inherited it.
"Sweet (animal) of (location)!" Lampshaded one on occasion, where Hermes was too traumatized to bother filling in the blanks.
Hermes: Sweet something of... someplace.
He often makes similes involving green snakes and sugar cane.
Hermes: I'm feeling lower than a green snake under a sugar cane truck.
This one is given an origin in "Planet Espresso", when his father, Badrick, tells him there are green snakes in lots of places.
The Comically Serious: A self-described "obsessive-compulsive, anal and snotty" bureaucrat who takes boring tasks very seriously, to the point where it makes him weirdly amusing and dorky.
Cybernetics Eat Your Soul: In "The Six Million Dollar Mon", Hermes becomes addicted to upgrading himself with robotic parts. This culminates in him becoming 'Mecha Hermes,' a hulking, emotionless, Do-Anything Robot that houses his brain.
Deadpan Snarker: He was always this, even in his debut episode.
Leela: [reading the surprisingly comprehensive waiver attached to her new job application] Look, I don't know about your previous captains, but I intend to do as little dying as possible.
Hermes: [laughs, then turns deadly serious] Sign de paper.
Dreadlock Rasta: A bizarre subversion. Despite being Jamaican, a Rastafarian and fond of marijuana, Hermes is an Obstructive Bureaucrat and often attempts to run Planet Express with dictatorial efficiency.
Everyone Has Standards:
In "Silence of the Clamps" he shows a worried look when Bender decides to cut a pizza, something that Zoidberg takes offense to. For all his hate and cruelty towards Zoidberg, he knows better than to do the one thing guaranteed to piss him off.
While he truly despises Zoidberg and has never made any secret of this, he draws the line at killing him. ... at least, until one of Zoidberg's epic screw-ups reduces him to a pile of gore.
Fantastic Racism: It's strongly implied that Hermes' biased hatred against Zoidberg may at least partially be due to the latter being a Decapoidian; Hermes has even called him a "filthy crab".
Formerly Fit: Hermes used to be fit enough for the Olympics, until a fan fatally attempted to emulate him. That and the munchies (though he's still great at limboing).
Full-Conversion Cyborg: In "The Six Million Dollar Mon", he replaces pieces of his body with cybernetics until he's reduced to an organic brain (and dreadlocks) in a hulking mecha-Hermes. Then he decides to replace his brain with a robot CPU as well...
The Generic Guy: He is a dedicated, anal-retentive worker who loves his job, but the lack of focus on his character can cause him to come off as this, with his most pronounced personality trait in earlier seasons being his hatred of Zoidberg. Later episodes give him more Character Development.
Happily Married: To the beautiful La Barbara. She always goes over to her ex-husband Barbados Slim however if Hermes is not available for whatever reason (like having his head chopped off).
Heart Is an Awesome Power: Who knew limbo skills had so many uses? It's also frequently implied that his superhuman skills as a bureaucrat are one of the only reasons why Planet Express hasn't gone under.
Henpecked Husband: La Barbara also scolds Dwight, their son, often.
I Was Quite a Looker: He has very much gotten out of shape since his limboing days (apparently due to "the munchies"), although he's still a champion limbo master.
Informed Attribute: Despite the running jokes about him being The Stoner, he's never shown actually smoking or clearly high onscreen. Dwight does find a blunt of his once, and he is shown buying some CBD oil in "The Impossible Stream," so it can be assumed he only uses the stuff at home since he's a workaholic.
Irrational Hatred: Before Zoidberg was characterized as a disgusting bum, Hermes already disliked him, starting as early as the third episode, when he spat out some food he'd just been enjoying when Zoidberg said he'd made them (to be fair, it was crab and Zoidberg is a crab). It grew in "Hell is Other Robots", when he begins blaming Zoidberg for the rising electricity bills, and removes several items Zoidberg enjoys and uses from the office.
Jerkass: Bordering on Ambiguously Evil.
He is particularly proud of being a bureaucrat because they "treat people like swine and make them stand in line," even if he doesn't get paid for it.
He really hates Zoidberg (even more than everyone else), and often blames him regardless of whether or not he's actually done anything wrong.
Should the Professor decide he's not cold-hearted enough to fire the entire crew, Hermes will do it for him, instantly. And when presented with the opportunity to kill his coworkers, he actually had to think about it.
He hands Leela a gun and tells her to shoot the others. When she reaffirms that she's only going to use it for defense, he just shrugs it off.
Apparently, he needs a license to kill. For what remains unclear, but he will be using piano wire.
After Fry and Bender enlist in the Army, Hermes fires them immediately. Although, he does feel bad about it. To be clear, by American law, this is also highly illegal. If one goes off to serve their country, their companies need to guarantee that they will have a job when they return (though you can still be fired for other generic reasons like being a bad employee).
In another episode, when Bender is crippled by a can-opener, Hermes joyfully tells him it's Hermes' dream come true.
He is very interested to learn that the Grunka Lunkas are a lot cheaper than his own employees and that they're basically slaves.
Jerkass to One: Hermes can be a jerk a lot of the time, but it's framed as a "strictly business" affair for him; it's either a request, something that makes his life easier, or something that makes money. Zoidberg, though, seems to be the only person he actively goes out of his way to antagonize and will insult even without any kind of motive.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold:
He approved Bender (then an infant) on the production line even though he was defective and should have, according to regulation, been immediately destroyed. Years later, he assists Bender as he struggles with accepting his newly discovered mortality.
He also wasn't angry with Leela for messing up when she was filling in for him, and easily helped get everything back on track.
When Fry reads his mind in "Into the Wild Green Yonder", it is revealed that Hermes secretly thinks that Zoidberg is "pathetic but lovable".
Lampshade Hanging: As part of him being the Only Sane Man, he's a frequent source of this. At one point, he outright laments "Didn't we used to be a delivery company?" during one of Fry and Bender's Zany Schemes.
He also provides this gem in the comics regarding the Professor's Catchphrase: "'Good news, everyone!' is a registered trademark of Planet Express. The management guarantees no actual good news".
Lost Food Grievance: A minor recurring gag has him lamenting the loss of his Manwich.
Mad Libs Catchphrase: "Sweet [noun] of [rhyming location]!" At one point, he literally says "sweet something of someplace" since he's too traumatized to think of a good rhyme.
Manchild:
Hermes: I think I'm coming down with circusitis. [sneezes — he ends up looking like a clown]
Leela: [confused] I thought circusitis only affected children.
Hermes: [ashamed] Children of all ages.
Meaningful Name: He shares his first name with the Greek god of messengers, which is pretty appropriate for a bureaucrat assigned to a delivery company. His last name also sounding like "comrade" serves as a subtle indicator that despite acting like a Bad Boss most of the time, he really does actually care for his coworkers and does actually see them as friends.
Naked People Are Funny: Along with the Professor, Hermes will strip naked at the earliest opportunity for some good old fashion Fan Disservice.
Not So Above It All: Hermes may come across as a driven, cold heartless bureaucrat... and he is. But he'll also jump at the chance for a day off, same as anyone else.
Number Two: He works very closely with Farnsworth in the business and is largely seen by many as his most competent employee.
Obsessed Are the Listmakers: Averted... kind of. He once stated he's only anal 78.36% of the time.
Obstructive Bureaucrat: And he's incredibly proud of it.
We didn't choose to be bureaucrats
No, that's what almighty Jah made us
We'd treat people like swine and make them stand in line
Even if nobody paid us!
Only Sane Man: He often takes this role, most notably in Bender's Big Score where he's the only person to realize the crew is being scammed. He's also the most consistent critic of the incompetent Zoidberg.
Paperworkaholic: Hermes's primary character trait. Working for the Central Bureaucracy, he loves filling out paperwork. He even has a song about it:
We didn't choose to be bureaucrats
No, that's what Almighty Jah made us
We'd treat people like swine and make them stand in line
Even if nobody paid us!
They say the world looks down on the bureaucrats
They say we're anal, compulsive and weird
But when push comes to shove you gotta do what you love
Even if it's not a good idea
Puppeteer Parasite: One Running Gag is him getting infected by brain slugs. It even happens to him in the video game (also serving as a Hand Wave for why he isn't involved otherwise).
Retired Badass: Parodied. Hermes was once an Olympic limbo champion, who retired when a young fan of his tried to imitate him, and tragically broke his spine in the attempt. A traumatized Hermes was incapable of limboing from that day forth.
Second Episode Introduction: Introduced in the second episode, along with the other supporting Planet Express members (Zoidberg and Amy).
So Proud of You: His reaction to Dwight and Cubert's behavior in "The Route of All Evil".
Hermes: Proud of you? You ruined us with sleazy business practices, and a complete disregard for decency! ... of course we're proud of you!
Stereotype Flip: He's a workaholic, anal-retentive Rastafarian.
The Stoner: Heavily implied in the Comedy Central episodes more than the FOX ones.
La Barbara: Husband! Can't you go anywhere without lightin' something up?
Trademark Favorite Food: He is rather fond of sloppy joes, to the point "My Manwich!" is his Catchphrase.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Hermes isn't much to look at, but his wife La Barbara is quite stunning.
Unaffected by Spice: La Barbara Conrad's goat curry is spicy enough to burn through the floor all the way down to Robot Hell and make the Robot Devil scream in pain, but Hermes thinks it could use more seasoning.
Vocal Evolution: Becomes noticeably hoarser from Season 5 on. His voice was also much deeper in some of his earlier appearances. There were also a few early episodes in which his Jamaican accent was not prominent, notably in "Love's Labours Lost in Space" where he doesn't even have an accent.
The Wonka: He once gave himself a tongue-lashing and kicked himself out of his own office for asking to take Valentine's Day off.
Workplace-Acquired Abilities: It's been shown multiple times in the series that Hermes can beat foes through his dedication to the Central Bureaucracy. He defeats the fishermen and frees the captured humans by pointing out that they had violated the fishing contracts and beats Morgan Proctor by discovering that she improperly filled a form.