Alliterative Name: Kif Kroker.
Beleaguered Assistant: To Zapp; he constantly has to put up with Zapp's big ego, unreasonable demands, and generally saying stupid things. It's to the point that his Catchphrase is a weary sigh in response to whatever Zapp has just said.
Beware the Nice Ones: He turns out to be a pretty demanding boss when he has an underling of his own, and after learning that Zapp used his temporary death as an excuse to sleep with Amy he snaps and punches Zapp right in the stomach.
Bizarre Alien Biology: His digits can stick to walls and ceilings, he has no muscles or bones (his body is supported by bags of fluid instead), and we've also seen him inflate his head (to scare off predators on his home world) — and only his head, get your mind out of the gutter. He reproduces via touch ("No glove, no love.") and it seems anyone in his race can reproduce, regardless of gender. His race is otherwise amphibian (they are born as tadpoles that are water-bound then become bipeds that can live on land about twenty years after being born). Also, his race has a late metamorphosis stage in which they become clouds of Hive Mind-operating fly-like creatures (his father is this form). In Proposition Infinity, Kif says that he would be the closest related to the Sea Cucumber out of all of Earth's aquatic animals.
Butt-Monkey: Zapp frequently has him do humiliating things, and Kif often gets the blame when Zapp makes a mistake.
Camp Straight: He likes the color pink and other typically feminine things, but he's in a happy relationship with Amy.
Catchphrase: An exasperated sigh, always in response to whatever dumb thing Zapp has just said. It seems to be contagious: in Into the Wild Green Yonder, Bender does it with him.
Characterization Marches On: In his early appearances, he was a Deadpan Snarker who was clearly disgusted with Zapp's stupidity; the creators actually came up with him based on the question "What if Spock had hated Kirk?". In subsequent episodes, he quickly evolved into an Extreme Doormat, miserably suffering under his boss' idiotic commands.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: To Zapp, despite not wanting to be, although he can't bring himself to stop. In one of the comics, he becomes extremely depressed when Zapp gets a new toady (and goes into an Unstoppable Rage when said toady is manipulating Zapp).
Deadpan Snarker: Especially early on, before he hooked up with Amy.
The Dog Bites Back: In "The Beast With a Billion Backs", where he punches Brannigan in the stomach for sleeping with Amy. It was a long time coming. Played straight in the episode "Zapp gets Cancelled" where he reaches his breaking point after Zapp uses him as a towel/loofah during his shower, and squirts his blood like a hose at an alien enemy. Kif files a formal complaint against Zapp, who is stripped of his leadership and force to go to sensitivity camp.
Drill Sergeant Nasty: Turns out to be this once he gets a subordinate. It's mostly the result of pent-up stress from serving under Zapp, though.
The Eeyore: He's almost always in a depressed mood, and only perks up when around Amy. Justified, since he's constantly mistreated by Zapp.
Endearingly Dorky: He serves as Zapp's meeker, smarter alien assistant. He tends to be a very insecure, neurotic and socially awkward pushover and becomes painfully shy when he's around his love interest, Amy, a very pretty human girl who actually returns his feelings.
Extreme Doormat: It starts in Season 2, when Kif is fired with Brannigan, and yet inexplicably goes along with him into homelessness and prostitution. Even more so after he hooks up with Amy, he becomes less of a Deadpan Snarker and much more passive.
Freudian Excuse: In the comics, it's revealed that the reason he puts up with Zapp's constant abuse because Kif feels guilty for betraying Zapp by helping with the cover-up and leaving him a frozen body in space.
Frog Men: While appearance-wise he resembles a Little Green Man, his Bizarre Alien Biology makes him very similar to a frog, such as his ability to stick to walls and ceilings and how his species gives birth to tadpoles. His last name, Kroker, is also a pun on "croaker", as in the sound a frog makes.
Full-Frontal Assault: "Children of a Lesser Bog" has him rescue Zapp from some giant tardigrades while nude, removing his clothes mainly to ensure the effectiveness of his camouflage ability.
Green-Skinned Space Babe: A male example in-universe. Females in at least two cultures of humanoids find him attractive.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Hypercompetent might be pushing it a bit, but he's got a good head on his shoulders and is usually standing near Zapp.
Hypocritical Humor: In "War is the H-Word", Fry is demoted to Kif's assistant and Kif proves to be an even worse boss than Zapp, being openly hostile towards and constantly yelling at Fry, even calling him a "worm." Then again, working for Zapp definitely has led to some severely repressed anger on Kif's part, and Kif has more than enough decency to at least not find a way to endanger Fry's life like Zapp would, so it could always be much, much worse.
I Just Want to Be Badass: A couple of times. He does pretty well, all things considered.
Informed Attractiveness: Out of Zapp, Kif, and Fry, Kif is apparently supposed to be the best looking. At least, according to the Fem-Puter. The art style makes this pretty difficult to tell. Though his attractiveness may be due to having the least repulsive personality compared to the other men present.
Fem-Puter: Kif, as the most attractive male, will be snu-snued by the most beautiful women of Amazonia... then the large women... then the petite women... then the large women again.
Insecure Love Interest: He has awful self esteem that causes him great anxiety whenever he tries to impress Amy, especially due to her immense wealth and cuteness, but she always reassures him that he's good enough for her.
Interspecies Romance: He's an amphibious alien and Amy is his human girlfriend.
Invisible Streaker: In "Children of a Lesser Bog", he removes his clothes when he rescues Zapp from the giant tardigrades to ensure the effectiveness of his camouflage ability.
Let's Get Dangerous!:
In "Where the Buggalo Roam", Kif rides the Martian equivalent of a cow through a sandstorm to save Amy from a tornado.
"300 Big Boys" shows that Kif is actually capable of holding his own in a fight, when he's put on the front lines of the Spiderian War.
Little Green Men: He fits the bill for being small and green. However, neither he, nor his species, have hostility towards humanity.
Mister Seahorse: He becomes pregnant in the aptly-named "Kif Gets Knocked Up A Notch". Apparently, his species has a strange method of reproduction.
Nervous Wreck: He tends to stutter and hyperventilate incomprehensibly when he's nervous. He also tends to lose control of his camouflage reflex when under stress.
Nice Guy: He's kind of snarky early on, but grows more into a shy, sensitive nice guy through his relationship with Amy. He also doesn't have any bad blood with Fry after the events of "War Is the H-Word", even giving him a friendly greeting after getting launched into space by Zapp in "The Beast with a Billion Backs".
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: As we learn from Zapp's origin story, after Zapp became a jackass as a result of botched cloning, he was frozen in carbonite and sent into space forever, and would have remained that way... but Kif put a note in his prison telling people to return him, and the two blackmailed the government into giving Zapp his position. If it weren't for Kif, Zapp wouldn't be around at all.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: His voice is somewhat of a mixture of Jon Lovitz and Truman Capote.
No-Respect Guy: He is put upon a lot because Zapp blames him for his own failings.
No Social Skills: He has issues interacting with other people due to abuse from Zapp.
Occidental Otaku: In the comics, he's shown to have various anime posters hanging in his room.
Only Sane Man: When you work with someone like Zapp, you're this by default.
Punny Name: "Kroker" as in "croaker" as in "frog."
Rubber Man: A mild form of this. Being an amphibian-like alien with no bones, he can stretch himself to a considerable degree, though this causes apparent discomfort and isn't really treated as a superpower.
Running Gag:
Kif being accused of being spineless, causing him to explain he doesn't have a spine and his body is supported by a series of fluid-filled bladders. He often gets cut off though before he can finish.
One from the early seasons is Kif's disgusted reactions when following Zapp up a ladder, implying that Brannigan eschews underwear in addition to pants.
Sarcastic Devotee: He sticks behind Zapp no matter what (probably because it's his place in the military), but makes it painfully obvious that he hates Brannigan for it. Oddly enough, Zapp is never fazed by Kif's commentaries.
Satellite Character: Initially, he was only ever really seen alongside Zapp and is usually a snarky Beleaguered Assistant that was always far more intelligent than his boss. Averted in episodes following his Relationship Upgrade with Amy, in which he started having comparatively more screentime to himself.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Savvy Guy to Amy's Energetic Girl.
The Scapegoat: Official Zapp policy seems to be blaming Kif whenever he does something wrong.
Kif, stand by to take the blame... now!
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Sensitive Guy to Zapp's Manly Man.
Shrinking Violet: Usually a Deadpan Snarker when dealing with Zapp (at least in early episodes), but seems to show this side when his Love Interest Amy is around. In the episode that brought them together as a couple, she kept getting phone calls of someone breathing and panting heavily on the other end; she assumed they were prank calls, when it was really Kif calling to tell her how he feels, but too scared to say anything, thus hyperventilating until he hung up.
Teeny Weenie: It's implied his penis size is unimpressive in "Proposition Infinity", where his quarrel with Amy at the beginning of the episode has him respond to Amy calling him a jellyfish by stating that he's more closely related to the sea cucumber, with Amy retorting "Not where it counts."
Undying Loyalty: A bizarre example: he clearly despises Zapp, but goes along with everything he does and is always at his side no matter what. Kif goes into homelessness and prostitution with Zapp despite the latter getting him fired in "Brannigan Begin Again", and he even trusted Zapp enough to make him the best man during his wedding to Amy in "The Beast with a Billion Backs". The comics eventually reveal that Zapp stood up for him when he first joined the army, saved his life numerous times, and was actually a good friend to him; Kif genuinely doesn't think Zapp is a bad person at his core, but only after what the government did to him changed his personality, making it more understandable.
However, this is all Deconstructed. As Kif would stand against Zapp if he goes too far with his methods and threats towards Planet Express and more.
Ultimately, Kif's true loyalty is to Amy.
Uptight Loves Wild: The world-weary and cynical Kif and the fun party girl Amy fall for each other.
Yank the Dog's Chain: "Brannigan, Begin Again" has him find a competent boss in Leela, and despite his irritating her with his tales of how awful Zapp is, he still enjoys the feeling of being free from Zapp's command. Then Zapp mutinies, and Kif is dragged back into being his assistant.