Ace Pilot: Despite frequent jokes about her lack of depth perception due to having only one eye, Leela is a very competent pilot.
Action Girl: Easily the most badass person on the crew. She is strong, tough, and highly skilled in martial arts.
Action Girlfriend: To Fry. She has fighting skills, and in most stand-up fights Fry is cowering behind Leela.
Adam and Eve Plot: Leela was suckered into one by Alcazar who tricked her into believing they were the last of her supposed alien species. Later happened again with Zapp Brannigan who managed to convince her that they were the last two humans alive, on a literal Garden of Eden like planet, later discovered to be Earth.
Aggressive Submissive: Implied. She has anger issues and a knee-jerk tendency towards violence, but from what we see of her sex life, she's fairly gentle and borderline coquettish. In "Near-Death Wish," she admits to Fry that his take-charge attitude during the mission is turning her on.
Allegedly Dateless: She's sometimes the butt of jokes about her lack of a love life, particularly in both Valentine's Day episodes, but gets several boyfriends over the course of the series, even with her self-proclaimed high standards. Granted, this is usually because she's being contrasted with Amy.
Ambiguously Bi: Leela has Fry as her canon love interest, having an on and off relationship with him and dated several men, yet she enjoyed making out with Amy in Bender's Game while in the alternate reality of Cornwood. Whether that extends beyond that dimension is debatable but has not been seen. This fluidity is also present when she enters a romantic relationship with Yivo, a celestial being of indeterminate gender. While she mostly pursues men like the shallow Adlai Atkins or the persistent Zapp Brannigan, these specific encounters with Amy and Yivo suggest her attractions might be broader than her typical dating history implies.
Amusingly Awful Aim: As a cyclops with awful depth perception, Leela's aim with projectiles is sometimes played for laughs. In "A Leela of Her Own," she becomes a famous blernsball player because she's such a godawful pitcher, constantly hitting the batters in the head.
Animal Lover: She's a known animal lover, fawning over animals and alien critters, even disgustingly hideous ones that keep trying to attack her.
Animal Nemesis: In "Möbius Dick", a Whole-Plot Reference to Moby-Dick. It parodies the concept further, as the Space Whale she hunts feeds on obsession, so it naturally antagonizes ship captains. Leela eventually overwhelms the whale's will with a bigger obsession than revenge: finishing her delivery!
Anti-Role Model: In-Universe, her complete and utter failure as the first female blernsball player caused women to sign up in droves just to prove Leela isn't representative of their sex when it comes to sports.
Artists Are Attractive: Has a thing for musicians. Her ex boyfriend Sean could play the saxophone and she first truly falls for Fry when he learns to play the holophoner.
Badass Normal: In a universe filled with aliens, robots and destructive weapons, Leela's first usual instinct to deal with trouble is to proceed to kick it in the face, and maybe use a gun if she has to — though she tends to do worse with that. If a threat is deadlier than her, this is around the point it makes it apparent, but props for defusing a multitude of problems across the series this way. She becomes a bit less normal with her mutant growth, yet notably never actually uses any of them in an real way for combat.
Bad Boss: A mild case — as captain of the Planet Express ship, she often puts pride or personal grudges over the safety of her crew. It's blown up in "Mobius Dick" when she goes Captain Ahab levels of crazy and wants to risk everybody's lives to kill the space whale.
Berserk Button: Parodied in the pilot as a Bait-and-Switch — Smitty tells her, "Keep your big nose out of this, eyeball!" and she remarks "No-one makes fun of my nose!" Later episodes have established that her real insecurity is her eye, and the nose thing never comes up again.
Big-Breast Pride: Leela is quite proud of her "bazooms," and doesn't even mind when Scruffy breaks his spine due to her breasts distracting him.
Bizarre Human Biology: In the original series she was pretty much just a human with one big eye, as the least mutated mutant ever. The movies and the Comedy Central seasons added elbow talons (she trims them normally), a singing boil on her posterior, a mention that she lays an egg every few months. Her purple hair is also probably, probably a mutant trait, especially since she shares this trait with her mutant parents. "Leela and the Genestalk" implies that she's just been a late bloomer this whole time, since the plot involves her gradually turning into a bunch of tentacles.
Bully Hunter: Leela will kick the crap out of anyone who treats kids poorly since she was bullied by the other kids who made fun of her by calling her "One Eye" when she was raised in an orphanage.
Butter Face: Men will often admire the shape of her body, only to react in shock when they see her giant eye. Even Fry did this when he first met her.
Buxom Beauty Standard: She's a bit more well-endowed than Amy, with a throwaway gag implying she's gotten work done to make her chest bigger, and the men in her company tend to take notice.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: While generally an intelligent and cool-headed captain, Leela's blood-lust is shown to take over at a number of points, and her usual perceptiveness can sometimes fail her.
The Captain: Of the Planet Express delivery ship, making her a glorified truck driver, but a captain nonetheless.
Catchphrase:
"Awwwww." Said when she finds something cute, endearing or touching.
"Oh, Lord." Said when she's annoyed, fed up or exasperated by someone (usually Fry or Bender) but not angry enough to get violent.
"Hi-Yah." Yelled whenever she throws an attack (or, on occasion, something else, such as removing a plug from its socket).
Cleavage Window: She and Amy have some outfits with this. In "The Devil's Hands are Idle Playthings", Leela wears a long formal dress with a keyhole in the chest to Fry's opera. Also her wedding dress has a hole for her cleavage.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: To Fry (being his boss) for the first few episodes. After that, he adapts and stops being a Fish out of Temporal Water, though she still takes on this role from time to time.
The Comically Serious: She typically takes herself and her work very seriously, but the show manages to get a lot of humor out of giving her silly lines or absurd scenarios that she says/treats with her usual no-nonsense attitude.
Cool Uncle: Leela quickly becomes the Krocker-Wong children's favorite aunt. The fact she's their genetic parent probably helped build the connection.
Cute Monster Girl: A beautiful one-eyed woman descended from a race inflicted with all kinds of Body Horror. Her parents and people are formerly human, subterranean mutants and the fact that she happened to be born looking almost human is why they were able to pass her off as a Human Alien and send her to the surface world for a better life than they could give her.
Cuteness Proximity: Leela is often a victim of this, even in the presence of animals that are generally not that cute, such as the muck leech on Mars in Into the Wild Green Yonder. A muck leech who turns out to be evil. It annoys the Nibblonians when she does this to them as well.
Leela: Aww, you're all so cute!
Ken the Nibblonian: No, we're not! We're an ancient and powerful race!
Cyclops: Due to being a mutant. Her single eye doesn't seem to be much better or worse than a normal one, though, and she usually wears a contact. A few episodes do show her depth perception to be messed up, though.
Deadpan Snarker: Many of her lines amount to remarking sarcastically on the idiots with whom she works.
Decoy Backstory: Early in the series, all Leela knew about her history was that she was an alien abandoned by her parents, with no knowledge of her home planet. In "A Bicyclops Built for Two", Leela meets another cyclops named Alcazar, who tells her the story of their people, the Cyclopians. He tells Leela that Cyclopia was bombed by eyeless mole people, killing everybody except Alcazar, who was working in a pool, and Leela, who was shipped off the planet as an infant before the planet was destroyed. At the end of the episode, Alcazar reveals he's a shapeshifter, not a cyclops, who made the entire story up to marry Leela (and it's implied he did the same to several other girlfriends of other species). Later in the series, Leela learns why she never found her home planet: she's not an alien, but a sewer mutant, and her parents sent her above ground with an alien note so she could live without being subjected to a degrading life in the sewer like every other mutant.
Defrosting Ice Queen: She has a very cynical view of love in the original run of the series, believing she would never find someone right for her due to her very high standards. She becomes happier once she starts dating Fry, who may be stupid and childish, but who genuinely loves her more than any other man she's dated.
Depending on the Writer:
A lot of episodes (mostly the earlier ones) established her as a calm, sensible, unimpulsive woman who could defend herself in a pinch, though some episodes and the movies make her into a reckless, angry girl who would use violence as much as possible. She tries to conduct herself professionally for the sake of being the ship's captain but deep down, she harbors a lot of personal issues stemming from her origins and her life growing up. She has a lot of self-control, but under the right circumstances, she can be pushed into recklessness.
Just how much she's disabled by being a cyclops depends on the episode. While there's numerous jokes about her lack of depth perception, and "A Leela of Her Own" makes it a plot point, other episodes show her with competent aim. Essentially, her depth perception isn't an issue unless it works for the joke.
Determinator: If given the chance to pull off a daunting task, she will take it and refuse to back down, especially if someone insists she isn't able to do it. "Mobius Dick" takes this to extremes: she becomes so obsessed with killing the Space Whale and finishing her delivery that she gets engulfed by the whale and manages to overpower it with the sheer force of her obsession.
Deuteragonist: Arguably shares this role with Bender. While Bender may have more episodes centered on him, Leela's role as Fry's girlfriend makes her arguably the most important character in the series next to the other two.
Doorstop Baby: She was left at the door of the Orphanarium in a basket with a bracelet and undecipherable Alienese note. She even kept the basket for sentimental value.
Driven to Suicide: One of the few serious examples in the show. Towards the end of "The Sting", she becomes so distraught over her inability to separate reality from her own dreams caused by the guilt she feels that she decides the only way out is to eat enough space honey to fall into a perpetual sleep. Luckily, Fry manages to talk her out of it and then it turns out most of the episode was just Adventures in Comaland and she wakes up for real.
Dude Magnet: She has men falling for her pretty often, but this is shown to be subverted as often as it's played straight. It depends largely on the episode and the man.
First Girl Wins: She's the first woman Fry meets in the future, and remains his object of affection for the entire series.
Flanderization:
She started as very archetypal captain figure, the Straight Action Girl that was sorely needed to run a crew and company that were barely competent in their own individual rights, occasionally showing odd, questionable quirks. In each successive season (especially the Comedy Central ones), the latter aspect of her personality became increasingly prevalent to the point of consuming the rest of it, sometimes outright resembling Chickification. One could almost say that Fry didn't win her love by becoming smarter, but rather from her becoming dumber.
Leela's love for violence was played up later in the show and in the movies. Before that she just got irritated a lot and would sometimes react by punching people. In the movie, Bender's Game, the Professor has to put a shock collar on her to stop her from hitting and it doesn't even work. In fact, she starts to like the electric shocks because of her newly-formed association with them and violence. At one point, we see her moaning suggestively and repeatedly. This is because she associated the pain with the pleasure of beating people up.
Her being a mutant is played up much more in later seasons. In the original Fox run, Leela's mutations were limited to a single giant eye, purple hair and an immunity to radiation, with her otherwise being the same as a normal human. The movies and later episodes give her increasingly bizarre mutations, such as elbow talons (which she apparently trims regularly), a singing butt boil, a tendency to lay eggs and her mutating further into a grotesque mass of tentacles at one point.
Foil:
From the pilot, Leela and Fry have been compared and contrasted as two individuals who feel lost and lonely in their current society (Fry being a 20th century guy stuck in the 31st century, and Leela being abandoned her entire life with no idea clue about her original species). Leela usually provides the more rational approach to a situation while Fry takes the impulsive route, and Leela is much more emotionally withdrawn while Fry goes with the flow and says whatever stupid thing happens to come to mind. As the series progresses, the two form a close bond over their core similarity and slowly rub off on each other (Fry taking things more seriously and Leela learning to loosen up) while still staying true to their Uptight Loves Wild dynamic.
As the two main female characters, Leela and Amy are typically paired off to emphasize the Tomboy and Girly Girl dynamic. In scenes together, Leela gets played up as more unfeminine and awkward in contrast to Amy's social butterfly status (which the latter quite often points out) and Amy gets played up as more cute and ditzy to contrast Leela's tough rationality.
Four-Star Badass: In Bender's Big Score, Leela steps up to take command of the Earth fleet after a surprise attack leads the Nimbus to be shot down just seconds into the battle. The trope is later subverted as she does fail just as badly in the end after realizing how hard it is to actually command a fleet, forcing Hermes and Farnsworth to take over and save the day.
Friend to All Children: Being a former orphan herself, she's very kind to current kids at the orphanage. Dwight, being a little jerk, is the exception.
Genius Bruiser: Can kick someone's ass in seconds, is an Ace Pilot, and has been shown to be a knowledgeable, natural-born leader on many occasions. She's arguably the smartest member of the crew, next to the Professor and Bender.
Girls Like Musicians: Leela reveals she has a thing for musicians, having dated a saxophone player (until he cheated on her) and swooned over Fry when he played the holophoner for her when he was infected by a parasite that made him smarter, and again in the original finale when he trades his hands for the robot devil's.
Granola Girl: An environmentalist who loves the animals and nature.
Green-Skinned Space Babe: Subverted. Despite her curvy humanoid figure, she is considered ugly by 31st Century standards, and aside from Fry and Zapp (who both already had fantasies about mating with alien women), most men consider her one big eye to be a massive turnoff. She deviates further from the trope with the reveal that she's a mutant, not an alien.
Hairstyle Inertia: She's kept her ponytail since middle/high school, although as a grade schooler she wore her hair as pigtails and a brief flashback in "Fry and Leela's Big Fling" shows her with her hair down.
Handicapped Badass: Due to being a Cyclops, she only has one eye and lacks any form of depth perception. In spite of this, she's a skilled fighter and an Ace Pilot.
Horrible Judge of Character: When it comes to certain animals, such as space bees or bloodsucking leeches aka "Dark Ones". She also tends to express interest in men who are later revealed to be complete jerks.
Human All Along: She spends most of the original series believing she is an alien, but discovers in "Leela's Homeworld" that she's actually a mutated human born in the sewers of Earth.
Hypocrite: In "Leela and the Genestalk," she adamantly opposes Mom's genetic engineering experiments... but does a complete 180 on them when Mom offers to use it to cure her squidification.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She can be snarky and a bit aggressive sometimes, but she is a good and caring person underneath it all.
Just Friends: With Fry for the original series. The Comedy Central revival gives them a Relationship Upgrade while the ending of "Overclockwise" gives them a happy ending.
Karma Houdini: Played for Laughs in "Yo Leela Leela", where she gets away with ripping off an adorable alien species for her children's show. She isn't happy about this at all, especially when the Humplings insist on bearing no ill will towards Leela for what she's done.
Keeping the Handicap: In "The Cyber House Rules", she decides to undergo surgery to become a normal two-eyed woman. At the end of the episode, she goes back to having one eye because she understands this is an important part of her.
Kick Chick: Whenever Leela attacks someone, its almost always with a kick.
The Lancer: A case of The Hero (Fry) being an impulsive but good-natured idiot with occasional flashes of genius, his Lancer counterpart is the rational, intelligent but hot-tempered Leela.
Limited Wardrobe: On the job, she generally tends to wear the same tank-top and pants combination, sometimes wearing a lime-green jacket if they go somewhere cold. Since she's usually at work, that's what she tends to wear most.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: Masculine Girl to Fry's Feminine Boy. Leela is a strong-willed, tough-as-nails Action Girl, Fry is laid back, awkward, emotional, and usually a Non-Action Guy. Downplayed, as Fry is not that feminine (he's described in-universe as "boyish") but not manly either.
Master of the Mixed Message: The very thing that attracts her to Fry is the same thing that puts her off. There's also the fact she's insecure about her eye, but when Fry does try to compliment her, she gives him Hell for apparently only caring about her looks.
Meaningful Name: Turanga Leela is a reference to the "Turangalîla-Symphonie", a piece of music most famous for prominently featuring the ondes Martenot, forerunner of the classic sci-fi staple the theremin. Also, in the case of purple-haired Leela, "Lila" means "purple" in German.
Mood-Swinger: When she thought Fry stood her up and died in an explosion in "The Late Philip J. Fry":
Leela: I'm so angry. I mean, I'm so sad. But I'm still pretty angry. But also sad. [to Hermes] Can I be both?
Hermes: It's what he'd want.
Leela: Then that's what I am! [angrily kicks the television and sadly cries]
Ms. Fanservice: She's very busty, her standard outfit consists of skin-tight tank top and pants, her other "ordinary" outfits (such as formal dresses and swimsuits) invariably have a midriff window showing her belly button, and she's the most likely to be seen wearing strange, Stripperiffic outfits. She also tends to get naked a lot and seems fond of nude swimming and hot tubbing.
Murder Is the Best Solution: When she asks the What-If Machine what she would be like if she were "a little more impulsive" in "Anthology of Interest", this is her solution to everything. The episode implies that murder is the first solution that occurs to Leela all the time, and is only kept in check by her being a bit of a stick-in-the-mud. This is reinforced by her second What-If scenario parodying The Wizard of Oz, in which she unhesitantly kills the Cute Witch of the North after an insensitive comment and gleefully embraces the role of a wicked witch near the end.
Naïve Animal Lover: Compelled to protect animals of all types, even if they turn out not to be as helpless as she thought they were. This is what leads her to take on Nibbler as a pet.
In "The Sting", she gets Fry killed (although it's just a dream) by bringing a killer space bee aboard the Planet Express because "it's so cuuuutteee!" In "Bender's Game", she refuses to save her friends from a giant worm called the Tunneling Horror because she has just vowed to never kill another living thing.
In "Into The Wild Green Yonder" she kept trying to protect a muck leech even though it repeatedly attacked her and turned out to be the Big Bad
Name Order Confusion: Her first name, Turanga, is her surname.
Fry: "Turanga"?
Amy: That's her name, Phillip.
Bender: "Phillip?!"
Never My Fault: Often refuses to accept her mistakes or flaws such as in "The Problem with Popplers" and Bender's Game.
Not So Above It All: While Leela generally acts as one of the more level-headed and responsible members of the Planet Express crew, she can be just as reckless or childish as the others.
For instance, in one episode, rather than pay a nominal parking fee for a Hollywood premiere, she flies around for hours before landing on the La Brea Tar Pits... which is exactly the sort of thing she usually scolds Fry and Bender for.
In "A Head in the Polls", after she spends the whole episode encouraging Fry to take an interest in politics and the electoral process:
Farnsworth: I can't believe it. He won by a single vote.
Bender: Well it ain't my fault. I'm a non-voting felon, thank you.
Fry: Well it's not my fault either 'cause I forgot to vote.
Leela: Oh, crud! I knew there was something I meant to do today!
She stops Fry for whining about how the career chip hurt when inserted. Two seconds later, she does the same thing.
Tries to be the voice of reason with Free Waterfall Senior's hippies / gun-nuts, but admits she finds blowing up dams fun.
Official Couple: With Fry. They start dating from the Comedy Central revival onward after 5 seasons of Will They or Won't They?.
Once Done, Never Forgotten: In the original Fox run, she only had sex with Zapp once, in "Love's Labors Lost in Space", and it was pity sex only brought on by him repeatedly guilt-tripping her. Despite this, everyone from Bender to Zapp himself loves bringing it up and mocking her for it.
One's Freakiness, Another's Beauty: Leela is extremely sensitive about her huge single eye, due in large part to being made fun of while growing up in the Orphanarium. Fry had always been attracted to Leela, eyeball and all. In fact, when Leela gets a prosthetic second eye in "The Cyber House Rules", Fry is the only one who objects, saying that he liked her better the way she was.
One True Love: To Fry. No matter how many other women he is with, he still considers Leela to be the love of his life. Their relationship is very unstable, but they still seem to care for each other regardless of what happens. She does seem to love Fry, but is often put off by his lack of maturity. Eventually though, she and Fry have a more stable relationship.
Only Sane by Comparison: She's definitely a genius in comparison to Fry and the most functioning adult of the Planet Express crew with the least quirks or sociopathic tendencies. But that doesn't stop her from having serious anger issues, obsessive grudges, or from coming off as socially awkward around people who aren't her co-workers. She also has a very poorly adjusted life outside of work, due to her Friendless Background and not meeting her parents until adulthood.
Only Sane Woman: Easily the most level-headed member of the cast, especially compared to Fry and Bender. She has her moments, though, particularly when she is insulted. She holds very strong grudges.
Orphan's Ordeal: Being abandoned by her parents as a baby and growing up an unloved, disfigured orphan is the source of most of her cynicism and identity issues — it's the reason she took pity on Fry, whose family is long gone in the past, in the first place. Early episodes like "Xmas Story," "The Cyber House Rules," and "A Bicyclops Built for Two" explore how lonely she feels not knowing her family or even her species, and it's one of the few subjects that can crack through her tough exterior. "Leela's Homeworld" finally has her track down her parents and learn why she was abandoned; from then on, they have a very loving relationship.
Orphanage of Fear: The "Orphanarium" where she grew up seems to be an odd mixture of this and Orphanage of Love—it was (and still is) dirt-poor and she was picked on constantly, but the Warden seems like a nice guy... sort of.
Leela: Mr. Voggle, remember me?
Mr. Voggle: Leela. You're worthless and no one will ever love you!
[both laugh and hug]
Leela: You used to say that all the time!
Mr. Voggle: Those were happier days.
Otherworldly Technicolour Hair: Leela's hair is purple, and she was initially thought to be an alien from an unknown planet, but eventually, she's revealed to be a mutant human. Her parents were mutants relegated to living in a sewer, who tricked the surface-dwellers into thinking she was an alien so she would be allowed to live on the surface and have better opportunities in life.
Quest for the Rest: Leela embarks on a long search for other one-eyed aliens, which almost leads to a disastrous marriage to a shapeshifting con artist before her true background is revealed (she's a mutant whose parents abandoned and touted as an alien so she wouldn't face discrimination).
Radiation-Immune Mutants: As a Mutant, she can plunge into a lake of toxic waste, swim around in it, and it won't do a thing to her.
Real Women Don't Wear Dresses: Averted. While she's definitively more masculine than the other women in the show, being tough and authoritative, she has just as many feminine traits (including, yes, wearing dresses) which are never depicted as being unusual or out of character for her.
Relationship Upgrade: At the end of Into The Wild Green Yonder, she finally reciprocates Fry's feelings for her, and from then on out the show is relatively consistent at depicting them as a couple.
Ridiculously High Relationship Standards: Early in the series, Leela tends to only pursue men with impressive jobs and a sense of authority and importance — at one point, she daydreams about being married to a senator, and her actual boyfriends include a doctor and the mayor's aide. This may be due to her own insecurity (she's frequently rejected and ostracized for being a cyclops), as she says in "The Cyber House Rules" that she wants to date someone she can be seen with without anybody judging him. While her reasons for turning down men make some sense (she turns down a man with an unsettlingly long lizard tongue and she has pretty good reasons to turn down Zapp and Fry), her coworkers chastise her for her tendency to turn down any man with an off-putting "quirk" (even if some of them are genuinely justified).
Amy: You're too picky.
Fry: Yeah. If you rule out every guy with a lizard tongue or a low I.Q. or an explosive violent temper, of course you're gonna be lonely.
Leela: There's nothing wrong with having high standards.
Rubber-Forehead Alien: An Invoked Trope in her case; her parents tried to pass her off as one so she might have a better life than a sewer-dwelling mutant.
Shoe Size Angst: Leela wears size 12 shoes and is made fun of a couple times because of it.
Shorttank: She's the tomboyish female co-star.
Shout-Out: Her given name is an homage to a piece by 20th-century composer Olivier Messiaen, the "Turangalîla-Symphonie".
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: She tends to turn her attention more towards the good natured men depicted on the show and finally settles down with Fry, arguably the nicest character in the series.
Slapstick: She seems to get her fair share of slapstick in later seasons. She's been hit on the head, electrocuted, sucked by a leech, attacked by an octopus, smashed into a wall by a door and had her arm torn out of its socket.
Sleeves Are for Wimps: Leela's standard outfits are tank tops and other sleeveless outfits.
Smelly Feet Gag: Some episodes show that Leela, who typically wears boots a lot of the time has some stinky feet on her which she tries to deny.
Leela: Couldn't be me. I don't wear boots. See?
Fry: Eww. What smells like boot feet?
Soapbox Sadie: A few episodes show her to be a strong advocate for animal rights, particularly "The Birdbot of Ice-Catraz" and especially Into the Wild Green Yonder in which she joins a Straw Feminist eco-terrorist group to protest Leo Wong.
Sour Outside, Sad Inside: It's implied in several episodes that, despite her sardonic attitude and violent tendencies, she's repressing lots of trauma from being abandoned by her parents, bullied as a child and betrayed by most of her romantic relationships.
The Spock: Levelheaded, predictable Action Girl.
Statuesque Stunner: She's much taller than the rest of the Planet Express crew, even meeting Fry (who probably stands at or around 5'11" or 180 cm) at eye-level.
Stepford Smiler: Describes her method of coping with her tragic life by apologizing for a brief grief-stricken outburst and explaining that "usually I keep my sadness pent up inside where it can fester quietly as a mental illness".
Straight Man: The serious, no-nonsense girl who provides the setup for most of Fry/Bender's jokes. She's also this to pretty much everyone in the main cast. She does have her moments though.
Sweet Polly Oliver: For a time women were barred from serving in the military thanks to Zapp Brannigan's actions so she pretended to be a man to join as "Lee Lemon".
Super Wrist-Gadget: "This thing I wear on my wrist".
Tank-Top Tomboy: The level-headed, action-oriented leader of the Express crew. A tank top is her default outfit.
Team Mom: As one of the only close-to-sane members of the team, she often finds herself reeling in the rest of the crew from dangerous situations. So much that she follows Fry and Bender into the army so they won't get hurt. Bender even sarcastically calls her "mom" in "Fry Am the Egg Man" when she chastises them for eating unhealthily. "2-D Blacktop" exaggerates this trait by having her get so concerned with safety that she trades in the ship for the ship equivalent of a minivan, then behaving like a stereotypical soccer mom to the rest of the crew.
Thinks of Something Smart, Says Something Stupid: In "Simpsorama" (the Crossover with The Simpsons), Leela is introduced to Marge:
Marge: [thinking] Oh, don't mention her eye. Don't mention her eye.
Leela: [thinking] Don't mention her hair. Don't mention her hair.
Marge: I (Eye)... am so pleased to meet you.
Leela: Nice to be hair.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The tough, independent, and often messy tomboy to Amy's fashion-oriented, boy-crazy Girly Girl. Early designs for Leela had her be much more feminine but this was changed so Leela and Amy would contrast each other more.
Tomboyish Ponytail: Current page image. A no-nonsense gal who's by far the toughest member of the main cast, and has the ponytail to match. Into the Wild Green Yonder has her whip it around to show dominance.
Tomboyish Voice: Turanga Leela is a physically capable, assertive tomboy with a husky, low-pitched voice provided by Katey Sagal.
Tomboy with a Girly Streak: She's generally tough and masculine, but is plenty capable of showing sensitivity and vulnerability. She has a soft spot for cute animals and can be downright motherly at times.
Tsundere: She has a love for violence and hit mostly everyone at least once, besides her love interest Fry. She is usually sweet but Fry makes her irritated often, especially in the beginning. His stupidness, annoyingness, and immaturity brings it out of her turning her harsh. Leela at first didn't feel the same but as the series progressed, she fell in love with him, in part to Fry's persistence and also his consideration of her feelings.
Leela: Fry, you idiot! You noble idiot!
Turned Off by the Dumbass: One of the major reasons that it took so long for Fry and Leela to become an Official Couple, despite the two of them being very well-acquainted over the years, is Fry's reckless childishness. In "Time Keeps on Slippin'", Leela admits to Zoidberg in confidence that she finds Fry genuinely sweet and loves his "boyish charm," but is turned off by his immaturity. She eventually is able to look past it due to Fry becoming better able to demonstrate how much he sincerely cares about her and her well-being, leading to their Relationship Upgrade.
The Ugly Guy's Hot Daughter: Aside from the one eye, she is the most human looking member of her family. Her parents realized this and decided to put her up for adoption when she was born so she could live a normal life.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: After years of rejecting Fry's advances, he often does the same to her when she is hitting on him in later episodes.
Violently Protective Girlfriend: You may be able to sell Schmuck Bait to Fry with ease, but not with her around.
Woman Scorned: She often responds to romantic betrayal with violence. In the first movie, she's even excited at the prospect of Lars going on a suicide mission after he leaves her at the altar.
Women Are Wiser: Zig-zagged. She's usually the one taking Fry and Bender down from some crazy scheme or questioning the Professor's Insane Troll Logic, but is just as prone to stubborn (even stupid) mistakes as anyone else in the crew.
The Worf Effect: Not being Curb Stomped by Leela is a common way of establishing a major threat.
Working with the Ex: She and Fry were married, for all of the time it took her to file for divorce. Also later on she says that Fry and her's relationship is on again and off again. Eventually they settle into a more stable relationship.
Youthful Freckles: She's often depicted with them in her teenage years (although it could also be acne).