Abhorrent Admirer: To Leela. Zapp is quite handsome (if a bit overweight): Leela hates him purely for his personality. On their first encounter Leela sleeps with him out of pity, complicating things for herself for the rest of the series.
Aggressive Submissive: Despite being actively flirtatious and very forward with his advances, he seems to enjoy his partner taking control in the bedroom. This is most blatantly shown with the Amazonians, where he repeatedly requests for the restraint around his neck to be tighter and then to be spanked.
Ambiguously Bi: He has flirted with and slept with Leela and Amy and enjoyed getting Snu-Snu from several Amazonian women, yet he apparently went on a date with Richard Nixon's Head in "The Thief Of Baghead". He is also not ashamed to show nudity in front of other men such as Kif. Zapp does not even cover himself in front of other men whenever he is naked and some of the orders he gives out to Kif have some Homoerotic Subtext in them. When Kif finally files a formal complaint in "Zapp Gets Cancelled," many of his anecdotes are forms of sexual harassment, including performing an erotic fan dance in front of Kif and using him as a loofah on his genitals. He was however surprised when Leela pulled a Sweet Polly Oliver that he felt lust for a man but rolled with it.
Armchair Military: Zapp's approach to a fight is rarely, if ever, to actually be on the battlefield, rather watching from a distance, criticizing his troops for dying en masse. In the original run, he only shows up on a battlefield twice. The first time is on a horse on a hovering pad, rather than actually fighting, and the second is just to show off to the cameras. In "The Beast With A Billion Backs", he observes the hopeless battle against Yivo's genticles from the comfort and safety of the Times Square Applebee's. When he returns for the first time in the Hulu run, he actually tries to fight against giant tardigrades, but he has so few field experience that he can't even activate his gun, and Kif must come to his rescue and fight the tardigrades by himself.
Bad Boss: Often sends his men on deadly missions, expecting total loyalty out of them over ridiculous causes, and emotionally abusing them — you just know what a prick he is when his Second-In-Command Kif Kroker would rather face almost certain death than work for him.
Bender, under the influence of a "patriotic program" that Brannigan requested to implant on every robot: I volunteer for a suicide mission.
Zapp Brannigan: [...] When I'm in charge, every mission is a suicide mission.
Became Their Own Antithesis: He used to be a legitimately amazing soldier and thoroughly decent person, as per the tie-in comic series. However, this all changed when DOOP attempted to replace their standing army with clones of Zapp and the experiments damaged his DNA, twisting him into the wildly incompetent, low-key sociopathic and all around grossly impulsive Casanova Wannabe he is in the series.
Big Book of War: He stamped his name onto the Trope Namer. Given his track record, it's not something that should be read by those with any sense of self-preservation.
The Bully: On both a personal (e.g. his treatment of Kif) and professional (e.g. starting wars with guys like the Pacifists of the Gandhi Nebula) level, Zapp delights in picking on those who can't defend themselves.
Captain Ersatz: His appearance, attitude, position, and mannerisms are very similar to those of James T. Kirk. In fact, he was originally pitched as "What if William Shatner was captain of the Enterprise?"
Captain Space, Defender of Earth!: Although unlike most examples of the trope he is more explicitly a parody of Captain Kirk (his character was originally pitched as "What if William Shatner was captain of the Enterprise rather than Kirk?).
Casanova Wannabe: Despite his attitude, he once admitted that Leela is the only woman who's ever loved him — physically. He did get some action with the Amazonians, but that doesn't count. And judging by a few of Leela's off-handed comments, he wasn't even satisfactory in bed either; not in his opinion though, of course.
Corrupted Character Copy: He is a clear parody of Captain Kirk from Star Trek, poking fun at his more inept and egotistical moments (he was specifically meant to be if Kirk was more like the actor who played him). As a result, Zapp has Kirk's lustiness and ego cranked up to "parody," but lacks a good chunk of his competence or A Father to His Men traits, instead being a General Failure of a General Ripper constantly relying on We Have Reserves. Leela once had Pity Sex with him, and he never let her forget it.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass:
He's usually an arrogant, incompetent, idiotic, cowardly, selfish jerk. However, there are a few moments when he genuinely does something awesome like when he got rid of History's Greatest Villains in "Kif Gets Knocked Up". (Of course, this act almost destroyed his ship and killed everyone.)
His plan to fool the Omicronians by offering an orangutan in place of Leela in "The Problem With Popplers" actually would have worked if it wasn't ruined by Free Waterfall Jr. tipping Lrrr off to the whole thing. Absent the latter he would've successfully stopped the whole invasion with zero loss of sapient life.
Curb-Stomp Battle: He is only able to triumph over 'enemies' that are pacifistic and do not have an actual military, such as the natives of Eden VII or the retiree people of the Assisted Living Nebula. When facing an enemy who is 'not' a pacifist race and 'does' have a military, his forces are beaten almost effortlessly.
Damned by Faint Praise: A Running Gag is that whenever Zapp does have an offscreen victory mentioned, it tends to be against friendly-sounding, weak, or pacifistic races (i.e. the Retiree People of the Assisted Living Nebula).
Delusions of Eloquence: Overlapping with Mala Proper. Not a lot of people try to seduce a woman while pronouncing it "sham-paggan."note 
Dirty Coward: When the chips are down, he is shown to be this. This is best summed up in the episode In-A-Gadda-Da-Leela, where he wakes up from sleep, his first words are: "I surrender and volunteer for treason!"
Dodgy Toupee: Zapp is revealed to wear a toupee in "Kif Gets Knocked Up a Notch", as it almost blows off after he blows a hole in his ship.
Dreadful Musician: An INCREDIBLY terrible one at that. At one point during "Amazon Women in the Mood", he sings so badly that everyone flees for the escape pods and the glass covering the escape pod button shatters before the hand reaches it. (Doubles as a further reference to William Shatner, who is well-known for his, er... spotty singing career.)
Dumb Blonde: Male example. He has blond hair (eventually revealed to be a toupee) and is dumb as a rock.
Dumb Muscle: Despite his idiocy and cowardice, he shows himself to have quite a bit of physical strength from time to time.
Eats Babies: He continues to eat Popplers even after discovering what they are... during his peace negotiations with the Omicronians. He comments that they might taste even better with "quack-a-mole".
Lrrr: Stop eating our young! And it's pronounced "guaca-mole-ay"!
Everyone Has Standards:
He has enough of President McNeal's selfishness and decides to bag him up and send him to the Omicrons.
Zig-Zagged. While he has no qualms about sending armies of untrained civilians on suicide missions, whether he draws the line at Child Soldiers varies. In one episode, he didn't care and even commissioned a children's ship for war on the basis that "children are our future", but in Issue 41 of the comics, he was horrified after realizing he was brainwashed into making the camp's children into soldiers and immediately raced to stop them from going to war.
While he likely did it to get back in Leela's good books, even he knew her being sacrificed to Lrrr and Ndnd was senseless and devised a plan to save her by using an Orangutan as a decoy (a plan that actually almost worked). Zapp was also genuinely disgusted when Free Waterfall Jr. sabotaged the plan when it was so close to working for no good reason (they ate the decoy as well), which could have led to Earth getting in more trouble and Leela being sacrificed for nothing. Thankfully, it turned out okay.
Even Zapp is uncomfortable watching Kif and Amy's offspring get Eaten Alive before they have a chance to get on solid ground for the first time. And he sheds a tear of joy along with everyone else when Amy is announced as the true mother of Kif's children.
He's clearly very disturbed with Dr. Kind's actions and is sympathetic to the two other captains that have to work under him. He even avoids making off-handed comments to the female captain while they're under Kind's thumb, only making a crack about her starting a food fight out of nowhere when they were still there.
Evil Counterpart: To Fry. Both are moronic, lazy buffoons who are heavily in love with Leela, and she constantly rejects both of them. But while Fry proves time and time again that he can be selfless and heroic, sacrificing himself for Leela's safety multiple times, Zapp consistently shows to be a selfish coward who only really cares about himself and his image. Leela eventually warms up to Fry for his kindness, but remains disgusted by Zapp for the entire series.
Expy: the tie-in comics reveal that he was a hypercompetent and good-hearted man who was known as the greatest soldier that DOOP ever recruited before an experiment to clone him caused him to make a 180, becoming a vain, arrogant, pompous jerk. Basically, he is the reverse of Captain America. In the same issue, President Nixon even assigned him to a team of superheroes called the Marveleers, complete with expies of Iron Man, Thor, Hulk, Black Widow and Hawkeye.
The Expy With No Name: ...Zapp Brannigan, at your service.
Fake Ultimate Hero: Boy howdy. He has won offscreen victories, and taken credit for other people's deeds, so he keeps his job, and is even well-regarded by many. Most people think he's an amazing hero and The Ace, until they actually meet him. His men, who are around him constantly, have no such delusions.
Fantastic Racism: Towards the Neutrals, the Spheroids, mutants, and possibly others.
Fat Bastard: He has a prominent beer belly and is very sleazy, arrogant, and sexist.
Fat Idiot: It's not super obvious, but he has quite a gut. Best observed when he goes to a planet with super-high gravity and the force of his belly rips open his girdle. Kif calls him "The Fatso" (behind his back) in their introductory episode. As for the "idiot" part, that's self-explanatory. Though he is fluent in Morse code.
A Father to His Men: Subverted. While Zapp likes to style himself as a Parental Substitute to his officers, he's anything but.
Fully exemplified in this exchange at the beginning of "Amazon Women in the Mood", when Zapp notices Kif in anguish, pining over Amy.
Zapp: Kif, I'm headed to the men's room and I'll be needing an attendant, so— Oh, I'm sorry. You're crying like a woman. It's alright. I've always thought myself as a father figure to some of my more pathetic men. Kif, old friend, let's rap.
Kif: Well, I'm in love with this girl—
[Zapp bursts into a fit of derisive laughter]
Zapp: Oh, that's rich! [recovers himself] Go on.
Faux Affably Evil: He tries to act cheerful and amiable, but anyone who hangs around him for more than five seconds can see that he's really just a selfish and dim-witted creep.
Freudian Excuse: The comics reveal that Zapp used to be an outstanding soldier (both as a person and a fighter) until an attempt by the government to replace the army with clones of him went wrong. The resultant damage to Zapp's DNA left him the egotistical, incompetent jackass he is today.
General Failure: One of his primary gags. Zapp doesn't have a tactically competent bone in his body, and tends to only come out on top if he either ludicrously outclasses the enemy in terms of numbers and firepower, or has the Planet Express crew do the work for him. Even the first one doesn't save him all the time; in one episode, his army was completely routed by a band of Neanderthals with bone spears. It doesn't help that his first response for anything amounts to "swamp the enemy in bodies."
General Ripper:
Has started tons of unnecessary wars, including against a race of sapient balls on Spheron 1 (which resulted in them being forced off their home planet), the Spiderians, the Neutral Planet, the Retiree People of the Assisted Living Nebula, and the dreaded Pacifists of the Gandhi Nebula. He also attempted to get the Carcarons to declare war on Earth by having them sign a 'peace treaty' that was actually a declaration of war (in English, which the Carcarons don't understand) so he'd have an excuse to deploy the DOOP's fleet to crush them. The implication being that he had done this many times before.
President Nixon advocates just about everything Brannigan does, which is why he's able to be such a free wheeler. The Democratic Order Of Planets doesn't seem to really care (the only way he was able to get on their bad side was to destroy their brand new headquarters, otherwise they seem to ignore his attitude towards combat).
Handsome Lech: To some extent. He'd be played straight if he got rid of the gut.
Humans Are the Real Monsters: With the examples above, there's a valid argument to say that Zapp embodies the worst aspects of humanity in one single entity.
Hypocrite: He lays into Fry for his cowardice during a battle in "War is the H Word". Zapp Brannigan, who sends thousands of his men to die in pointless battles without fighting himself, and will surrender to the enemy immediately to save his own skin, is literally the last person to be calling anyone a coward.
In "When Aliens Attack", when the Omicronian invasion fleet pop in out of hyperspace and immediately start wiping out the Earth armada, he has the audacity to say:
"Stop exploding, you cowards!"
Idiot Houdini: Most of the time, despite endangering people through his constant idiocy and lack of regard for the life of anybody but himself, he rarely suffers any retribution for it.
Ignore the Fanservice: It's revealed that Zapp doesn't wear underwear and it's only by virtue of the length of his uniform top that he's not always exposed. But don't follow behind him while climbing a ladder. It seems he extended it to the soldiers under his command, and possibly the entire Earth military considering his high position in it.
Insufferable Imbecile: A sexist, arrogant jerk with next to no redeeming qualities but manages to be funny because of his idiocy.
Irrational Hatred:
Of the Neutrals, since he regards them as untrustworthy (and seems to genuinely think they're up to something).
Zapp: With enemies, you know where you stand, but with Neutrals? Who knows? It. Sickens. Me.
And on several occasions, of Kif, who he treats with undisguised and unprovoked contempt.
It's All About Me: He doesn't care about the danger any of his actions cause unless he ends up in danger from them.
Jerkass: He's got lots of examples that could be cited but a crowning moment might be the time he tried to pass off a declaration of war to a non-English-speaking alien race as a peace treaty, giving him the justification to invade their homeworld when their guard was down. Thankfully his translator, Leela's mother Munda, actually had a conscience and ratted him out.
Jerkass to One: While Zapp Brannigan is callous and a terrible leader on the best of days - sending all of his male soldiers to die needlessly and single-handedly having female officers banned from the Earth's military via sexual harassment—he is particularly abusive to his right-hand Kif. He insults him, has him do menial labor, takes advantage of what little hospitality Kif offers to give him, and has Kif dishonorably discharged along with him in "Brannigan, Begin Again" for a crime Kif had nothing to do with and sleeps with his grieving Fonfon Ru Amy. That last one bares mentioning since Zapp had Kif dislodge a missile they intended to fire, spamming the launch button while Kif was still stuck to it, leading to his death and eventually sleeping with Amy after the funeral, implying that Zapp genuinely views Kif as a nuisance rather than just a quintessential put-upon lackey.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk:
He shows himself as one in his very first appearance: after he breaks down to Leela and admits he's just an idiot who never has any idea what he's doing, he uses her sympathy to get her to have sex with him, gloating over it for the rest of the series.
In one episode, he accidentally causes his ship to go down, and he says that "the captain must go down with his ship." Kif comments on how noble that is of him; unfortunately, no prison can hold him, even if said prison happens to be a Titanic-styled ship with countless amenities to enjoy and cherish before the inevitable happens, and he immediately promotes Kif to captain before fleeing the ship in a one man pod.
Acting broken up by Kif's death in The Beast With a Billion Backs just so Amy would sleep with him. Thankfully he doesn't get off on this one because Kif finds this to be such an offense he finally stands up to Zapp and punches him.
His infamous plot to get Leela to have sex with him in "In A Gadda Da Leela".
In "Zapp Dingbat," he does have a genuine love and respect for Munda, but insists on being controlling of her in order for her to earn that love by lying to the Carcarons that they're signing a peace treaty, when really the document is a declaration of war. She refuses and instantly dumps him.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: He often likes to give a Techno Babble solution that is clearly something he made up on the spot — for instance, the "gravity boost" idea.
Lack of Empathy: He never shows any remorse for the physical and emotional harm his decisions inflict on others.
Large and in Charge: He's one of the taller characters (compare him to Fry and Bender here), has a broad upper body, and is rather stout. Occasionally it's shown that he's actually about as strong as he looks, such as in "Brannigan, Begin Again" where he's able to easily restrain Leela, drag the 150+ pound pillows as far as Fry and Bender (despite being fatter than them and logically having much worse stamina), and later effortlessly lift Kif with one arm. Or in "In A Gadda Da Leela" when he easily lifts the branch pinning Leela when he decides he wants to. He's too much of a wuss for this to come up often, though.
Large Ham: Imagine William Shatner playing William Shatner playing William Shatner... as Kirk.
Laser-Guided Karma: While he keeps his job depressingly well, most of the time Zapp ends up looking a fool.
Laughably Evil: In a serious show, he'd be a monstrous villain. See General Failure and General Ripper. But as it happens he's easily one of the funniest characters in the show.
Lawful Stupid: Played for Laughs. Zapp Brannigan will always enforce "Brannigan's Law" wherever he goes (a parody of the Prime Directive), even though he made the law up, and he has no idea what that law even is. Other than that, he is generally a selfish Dirty Coward who would happily sell out his friends and sacrifice hundreds of people to save himself.
Lethally Stupid: Whenever he is called for help, he'll come to make things worse.
Malaproper: He was introduced with the idea that he has issues with actually pronouncing "fancy" words, and he's kept it.
Zapp: Brave-o! EN-core!
Man With No Name: "Zapp Brannigan at your service!"
Manipulative Bastard:
In "In-A-Gadda-Da-Leela".
In "The Beast With a Billion Backs" acting bereaved over Kif's death to bed Amy was probably a new low for him.
Miles Gloriosus: The patron saint of this trope. He will never rush in to a fight, but obtained a reputation of being a good fighter through his willingness to sacrifice wave after wave of his own men, while avoiding any risk to himself. If he does end up fighting, it's because he believes he has an overwhelming advantage, or is too stupid to realize that he's in danger.
Modern Major General: At times.
Narcissist: He's shamelessly vain and full of himself.
The Neidermeyer: He's especially fond of saving himself by sacrificing those under his command.
Never My Fault: No matter what death and destruction his actions cause or whatever mistake he causes, he never admits to making a mistake himself. The following scene from "Brannigan, Begin Again" sums his attitude towards accountability perfectly, as he deflects blame and throws Kif under the bus, taking him down with him.
Glab: Zapp Brannigan, you stand accused of blowing up DOOP headquarters. How do you plead?
Zapp: Absolutely 99% not guilty.
[After Zapp is inevitably proven guilty, he stops to speak before leaving]
Zapp: I'd like to make one final statement. Kif, c'mere and hold up the flag. And wave it a little, for God's sakes. My friends, you can take away a man's title and his uniform but you can never take away his integrity or his honor. Plus it was mostly Kif's fault.
Kif: What?
Glab: Kif Kroker, you are also stripped of your rank and dishonorably discharged.
[Kif groans]
New Jobs As The Plot Demands: A minor example; it's a Running Gag that Zapp has a different, invariably silly-sounding rank whenever it's introduced. This has included "25-star General", "General Major Webelos"note , "Rear Brigadier", and "Commodore 64."
No Celebrities Were Harmed:
He bears many similarities to William Shatner. Word of God says this was intentional, as he was pitched as "What if William Shatner was captain of the Enterprise instead of James T. Kirk?" The episode "Amazon Women in the Mood" even features him doing a spoken word cover of a pop song, as Shatner is rather infamous for doing.
Reportedly, Billy West based a lot of his mannerisms on Phil Hartman, whom the role was originally meant for. Zapp has a lot in common with the characters Hartman tended to play in The Simpsons—a conceited but deeply untalented and immoral huckster with a smarmy "radio announcer" voice.
Nominal Hero: Zapp is technically on the side of good and does help out the heroes occasionally, but it's clear he's only doing it for the fame, clout, women, glory and/or wealth, not because he wants to help others or make a positive difference. It's safe to say the only reason he's not an straight-up villain is because he's too stupid to make it work or he knows he wouldn't get half the admiration and wealth he would as a hero.
The Obi-Wannabe: Especially when giving Kif love advice.
Of Corsets Funny: "C'mon girdle... Hooolddd..."
Pants-Free: Not only does he not wear pants, he doesn't wear underwear either. Kif finds this out the hard way when climbing up a ladder after him.
Parental Abandonment: Zapp's hinted to do this on occasion. He brings up once or twice the fact that he's often got slapped with failed paternity lawsuits from lovers in the past or virtual-reality lovers brought to life.
Pet the Dog: Amazingly, even Zapp has a small number of moments of genuine kindness and compassion, proving that he isn't completely irredeemable.
He's uncharacteristically sincere while providing assistance for Kif during his pregnancy in "Kif Gets Knocked Up a Notch", helping him and the Planet Express crew make the way to the birthing site on his massively swampy home planet, and congratulates him when his children are born safely. Much later in "Children of a Lesser Bog", Zapp offers to be "Captain Uncle" to Kif and Amy's now-maturing kids, and he sheds Tears of Joy with everyone else when Kif and Amy reunite with them at the end of the episode.
A bizarre example, but in "Brannigan, Begin Again", when Zapp sends the PE ship barrelling towards the Neutral Planet, he actually invites Kif along with him to safety and even found him a suit and helmet. Though Kif doesn't really have a say in it, the fact he also wanted to save him when he could have easily let him perish is an oddly touching moment. Another odd example comes from this episode when he asks Fry and Bender to be as loyal Kif is, citing him as the prime example of what loyalty means to him in his men. While it's likely just because Kif rarely has the spine to do anything against Zapp, the fact that he sees Kif as his most loyal soldier is quite nice.
He has a half-one in "Where the Buggalo Roam" when he compliments Kif on a brave act by calling it "Brannigan-worthy".
He genuinely loves Munda when he hooks up with her in "Zapp Dingbat", never mistreats her at any point during their short-lived relationship, and turns down Leela when the latter tries to win him over to try and prove he's an objectifying sleazebag with poor impulse control.
Pink Is Erotic: Zapp Brannigan is the perverted captain of The Nimbus and Leela's unwanted admirer. In his first episode, he seduces Leela into pity sex and makes all sorts of advances towards women. His bedroom is decorated with pink candles, he has a pink bed, and the walls are decorated in pink.
Psychopathic Manchild: He's very cowardly, dim-witted, immature, and perverted. Though that's more disturbing as he's also a high-ranking officer in the Earth's military, with the authority to get people killed in mass amounts. Which he fully utilizes to do just that.
Pyrrhic Victory: Pretty much his only battle strategy.
Ramming Always Works: His most effective "tactic" is to simply ram his ships into the enemy. His initial plan for the Omicronian invasion force was to have all his ships file directly into the alien cannons to clog them, and his plan for dealing with the "Neutral war machine" is to let the Planet Express ship build up sublight acceleration for several minutes and then crash it into the Neutral capital.
Screw Yourself: Issue 43 of the comic book has him dream that he's waiting for a date. After Fry enters his dream to sell him President Nixon collector plates, the woman turns out to be a female lookalike of himself. Being a narcissist, Zapp is completely okay with this.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Manly Man to Kif's Sensitive Guy.
Sexual Predator Boss: Women no longer serve in Earth's forces due to "lots of harmless pinching" committed by Zapp Brannigan. And as shown when Leela disguises herself as "Lee Lemon," other men aren't off the table for Brannigan either.
Shadow Archetype: He's essentially Fry with all of his flaws and none of his likeable qualities. Both of them are ditzes who love Leela, but while Fry respects her feelings and continually tries to better himself for her approval, Zapp only sees her as an object to be won and will never admit to or grow out of his faults. Ultimately, this is why Leela gets with Fry by the end.
Shameless Fanservice Guy: Despite his many, many personality flaws, he's quite attractive physically (though he does have a bit of a gut and one episode briefly reveals that he wears a Dodgy Toupee). He's also not ashamed to flaunt it, as he walks around naked in the background of Kif's video call to Amy in "Kif Gets Kicked Up a Notch", and it's regularly implied that he doesn't wear underwear.
Shout-Out: Between the many William Shatner shout outs, one stands out as he dramatically recites the lyrics to "Lola", imitating Shatner's infamous rendition of "Rocket Man". Not to mention ordering Kif to climb out on the wing and pretend he's a gremlin.
Small Name, Big Ego: Subverted. Someone with his personality would be a Small Name, Big Ego in most situations if not for his absurdly high rank.
Smug Snake: He does know what noble means, but thinks that that automatically means he also knows that noble is as noble does. Which is why Kif is fully allowed to do noble things, but only for principle's sake, as he's able to convince himself that Kif's triumphs ultimately don't matter; after all, he himself is already living his best life of being a captain who doesn't need to worry about telling "noble" and some weird phrase apart enough to know that they aren't mutually exclusive and are inevitably going to lead to wakes of destruction bound to backfire on him before anyone else 50% of the time.
The Sociopath: Egotistical, arrogant yet charming, incapable of learning from his mistakes, utterly without guilt for his actions, manipulative, an exceptional liar, and of course lacking a shred of respect for any life other than his own, Zapp shows all the classic signs of sociopathy. It's just that he's an idiot too.
The comics reveal he wasn't always this way and was once a legitimately good soldier, but experiments to clone him left his DNA permanently damaged and it changed him into what he is today. While his behavior is unacceptable, Zapp wasn't BORN a sociopath, making him a somewhat different example than most.
Sociopathic Soldier: Inverted. He started his career as a hyper-competent and genuinely empathetic soldier before managing to get promoted to captain not too long after, but DOOP's attempt to clone him went awry and turned his brain into mush. Now, he's a sociopathic "soldier" in name only.
Straw Misogynist: His levels of sexism are as complex as they are repulsive. Even after seeming to have gotten off happily with Munda, his backward "no battle of the sexes unless it's a final battle" mindset quickly comes into play, not viewing Munda as a slave, but trying rather forcefully to wear the pants in the relationship by making decisions that endanger other alien races for the sake of war and glamour (in this case, the Carcarons). And then there's his pickup routine... Whatever happened to that book clearly wasn't enough for him to re-learn his approach.
Teeny Weenie: Implied in The Beast with a Billion Backs.
Amy: Be careful, my little teeny greeny weenie!
Zapp: [covers crotch] That's just a fungal infection... Oh, she's talking to you, Kif.
Too Dumb to Live: In fact, it's even a wonder he is alive since half the things he does nearly get himself killed (the other half gets everyone else killed). Somehow he rationalizes bouncing between asteroids will induce "some kind of gravity boost" and thus he tries to pilot a gigantic space cruise liner through an asteroid field. His stupidity makes Fry look like a Nobel Prize scientist in comparison.
Ultimate Job Security: He keeps his job despite being a vain, womanizing idiot whose subordinates tend to die horribly, often by his own command. The most egregious example would have to be when it was explained that Zapp was such a rampant sexual-harasser that the DOOP opted to ban all women from serving in the military rather than punish him.
A tie-in comic book issue reveals that Zapp blackmailed President Nixon into granting him the title of "Captain for Life" in exchange for keeping quiet about the botched cloning experiment that was used to create an army of clones of him, coined by Nixon as "Zappgate."
Villain with Good Publicity: The only possible explanation for how he retains a job.
Villainous Crush: He sleeps with Leela in his debut episode and usually flirts with her in many of his appearances afterwards.
Wasted Beauty: He seems at first glance to be the dashing, heroic type, complete with handsome face and fine physique. Those who know him, however, are painfully aware of Brannigan's Know-Nothing Know-It-All pomposity, his Glory Hound arrogance, his Jerkass demeanor, and that he has attained command by being Kicked Upstairs.
We Have Reserves: His method for dealing with pretty much everything? Send wave after wave of men at the problem until it's solved or he runs out of men. In one particular case, he used this as a "clever strategy" to overload the kill counters of the Killbots (a strategy almost as effective as just letting the Killbots run rampant, though he might have been more concerned with preserving property than lives in that case).
Windmill Crusader: Has provoked wars with the least aggressive, least threatening races in the galaxy because he's convinced that being so unthreatening means they can't be trusted.
Would Hurt a Child: Has absolutely no problem sending children to their deaths in a battle. In fact, he once ordered the creation of a Children's Ship, on the basis that "children are our future."
Zerg Rush: A favorite tactic of his.
Zapp: [indicating enemy mothership on chart] ...my strategy is so simple an idiot could have devised it! On my command, all ships will line up and file directly into the alien death cannons, clogging them with wreckage!