Addictive Magic: Being a young boy who was very physically active before being paralyzed, he naturally gets very excited at his ability to Warg into Summer until he's spending hours doing it. Jojen warns him that doing this too much will cause him to forget he's actually human.
Amnesia Danger: Lot of things would be easier if he remembered how and why he fell.
Arch-Enemy: Serves as one to the Night King as Bran's status as the Three-Eyed Raven makes him the most dangerous adversary to the Army of the Dead.
Awful Truth: When he realizes his accidental warging of Hodor in the past lobotomized Hodor of higher thought processes, he is horrified and can't bring himself to look away for the rest of the episode.
Bad Liar: Cat notes that he always looks down every time he lies.
Be Careful What You Wish For: In the History and Lore videos, Bran notes that he always loved the scary stories told by Old Nan:
Bran: I don't like scary stories anymore. I'm in one.
Beyond the Impossible: While wargs are common beyond the Wall, and there are even some further south, Bran is apparently the first person in history to be able to warg into another human.
Big Brother Instinct: In Season 3, Bran knows that the journey Beyond the Wall is too dangerous for Rickon, so he chooses to send him away with Osha and Shaggydog.
Big Good: Bran becomes the Three-Eyed-Raven and the King of Westeros at the end of the show.
Depending on how accurate the prophecy of the Prince That Was Promised is, Bran may end up sharing this role with Jon, who would end up being the rebirth of the legendary hero Azor Ahai to rule the Six Kingdoms benevolently as they attempt to rebuild from the devastating wars of recent years.
Big Little Brother: By Season 6, he grows up considerably note  and is now the tallest of his siblings (of course, since he's crippled you can't tell most of the time). In an interview for Season 6, Richard Madden (Robb's actor) says he feels bad for Kristian (Nairn, Hodor's actor) for having to carry Isaac (Hempstead-Wright, Bran's actor) around because he is so big now. This didn't last terribly long for Nairn, as Hodor died only a few episodes into Season 6.
Big Ol' Eyebrows: Isaac Hempstead-Wright is developing these.
Broken Pedestal:
To Meera, who discovers that Bran has lost the battle for his sanity and turned into a utilitarian sociopath.
Downplayed, but Bran's faith in his father's teachings is shaken when he discovers that Ned Stark only defeated Arthur Dayne, the greatest swordsman in Westeros, thanks to the intervention of Howland Reed, who stabbed Dayne from behind.
The Bus Came Back: Returns in Season 6 after being absent in Season 5.
The Chessmaster: It's implied that he intentionally drove Daenerys mad by indirectly revealing she was not The Chosen One after all, after seeing visions of her instigating The Revolution Will Not Be Civilized on a global scale instead of a citywide one.
Children Forced to Kill: Like his older sister he's racked up a body count during his travel, including a couple of Wildlings and Locke. Right now, he's responsible for five deaths.
The Chosen One: Bran is destined to be the only person who can truly defeat the White Walkers and the Night's King. When he first meets the Three-Eyed-Raven the raven tells Bran that he has been waiting for him to arrive for a thousand years. By the halfway point of Season 6, Bran fully inherits the powers of the Three-Eyed-Raven and becomes his successor and his uncle Benjen tells Bran that when the Night's King finally invades Westeros Bran will be the one to stand against him. Subverted, as he had almost no involvement with the death of the Night's King.
If the prophecies of the Prince That Was Promised are true and apply to Jon Snow then Bran may not face him alone. In a thematic parallel, Bran's visions of Jon's true origins and power to oppose the Night's King may make him the Merlin to Jon's Arthur.
Composite Character: His green dreams about the sea flooding Winterfell are experienced by Jojen Reed in the books.
Creepy Good: As the new Three Eyed Raven, he's undoubtedly on the side of the living, but he scares everyone he meets. When you can creep out Littlefinger (with the 'Chaos is a ladder' remark), that is an achievement in creepiness.
Creepy Monotone: After fully becoming the Three-Eyed Raven, Bran's tone becomes robot-like and flat.
Dark Horse Victory: An odd example. He's voted in as King at the end of the series. The reason? Because he's the only one who sees the past and present and Tyrion believed his perspective will lead them to a better future and since he is a cripple and can't father children, Tyrion poses the idea that a new king will always be voted in by the high lords. Not bad for the disabled younger son of a family who, not so long ago, had been kicked out of their homeland and branded traitors.
Dead Guy Junior: His name is Brandon, the same as his father's older brother (and countless long-dead Starks).
Death of Personality: Downplayed. After becoming the Three-Eyed Raven, his personality and demeanour changes drastically. When Meera asks about this, he explains that Bran Stark is still in there, somewhere, but it's a drop in the ocean compared to the huge amount of memories and knowledge he gained. In effect, Bran has become a different person, but the old Bran isn't completely gone. Still, in Meera's view, the young boy she knew died in the Three-Eyed Raven's cave.
Despair Event Horizon: He wishes that he had died rather than being crippled for life. He eventually snaps out of this.
Dream-Crushing Handicap: At first. After Tyrion designs a saddle that will allow him to ride, based on Tyrion's own, it gets a little better.
Dreaming of Things to Come: When he finally follows the crow into the family crypt, he sees his father. That same episode, Winterfell receives word that Ned has been executed by Joffrey. Happens again with Theon's betrayal and Rodrik's death.
Dull Surprise: Purposefully. As the Three-Eyed Raven, Bran reacts to everything with a calm, reserved manner, to demonstrate how inhuman the process of becoming the Three-Eyed Raven has made him.
Failed a Spot Check: He is the only person who knows that Jon isn't his half-brother, but actually his cousin by Lyanna Stark and Rhaegar Targaryen. But despite his omniscience, he didn't know that Jon is actually a legitimate child until Jon's friend Samwell Tarly tells him thanks to a document he found in the Citadel which Bran later confirms through his visions in the weirwood tree.
Glass Cannon: He has Psychic Powers that allow him to enter the minds of animals and see into the past, but has no fighting abilities due to his unwillingless to use animals in combat.
Handicapped Badass: Although he can't walk he's become quite a powerful warg and later on the second Three-Eyed-Raven.
He Knows Too Much: The reason for his accident. And averted with Littlefinger, about whom Bran also knows too much - though by that point he knows too much about everything, with Littlefinger a small part of that - but Littlefinger is executed by Arya before he can act.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: He wanted to be a knight, which becomes something of an impossibility after Jaime pushes him out a window. He's very angsty about it at first.
Important Haircut: Returns in Season 6 with a very clean look.
Incompletely Trained:
During his absence in Season 5 and much of Season 6, Bran was being taught by the Three-Eyed-Raven how to control his visions and increase his warging abilities. However, after inadvertently revealing the location of the Raven's lair to the Night's King, the Raven is forced to upload all of his information into Bran's head, which causes him to experience visions even when he's not trying to induce them. Bran asks the Raven if he's ready for all of his power, to which the Raven replies with a "no" before doing it, anyway.
Bran was being taught archery early in Season 1. After he gets paralyzed, he no longer uses weapons.
Ironic Name: Unfortunately, what he discovers whilst climbing aforementioned castle walls, gets him thrown out of a window by Jaime Lannister and permanently crippled for his trouble.
It Sucks to Be the Chosen One: Oh yes. His journey to discover his destiny has been pretty much nothing but suffering, costing him many of his friends, family members and eventually, his own sense of self.
The Kid with the Remote Control: To Summer and to Hodor, too. Later taken to its logical extreme when Robb leaves for war and Bran becomes the acting lord of Winterfell.
Kubrick Stare: After losing his original self to his new identity as the Three Eyed Raven. Hilariously, this is largely due to his actor's poor vision.
Lack of Empathy: Has slid into this as of Season 7; after reuniting with Sansa at Winterfell he talks about how lovely the night was and how lovely Sansa looked on her wedding night to Ramsay, seemingly oblivious to the anguish caused by her rape at Ramsay's hands on that night and how hurtful the topic is. Later he is unable to recognize Meera's pain and sacrifice in saving his life, and only shows small satisfaction in seeing Arya again.
Loss of Identity: As he becomes the Three-Eyed Raven, the sweet kid Bran Stark starts to fade away.
Bran: I'm not really (Bran). Not anymore. I remember what it felt like, to be Brandon Stark. But I remember so much else now.
Meera: You died in that cave.
Magic Misfire: While time travelling to the past to learn a final lesson from the Three-Eye Crow, Bran and his group come under attack by white walkers. Meera's shouting to Bran to "Warg Hodor!" panics him and causes Bran to possess Wylis (who would grow up to be Hodor) in the past he was visiting as well as the present Hodor, connecting all three minds. Wylis can't handle this sudden influx of information and has a seizure, causing him the brain damage that turned him into the Hodor of the present.
The Magnificent: Ends up reigning over the Six Kingdoms as King Brandon the Broken.
Meaningful Name: He's mentioned as having a love of climbing the castle walls. His legendary ancestor and namesake, Bran the Builder, was the one who first orchestrated the building of the Wall. In Season 3, Jojen Reed tells him that the three-eyed raven he keeps seeing in his dreams is really Bran himself. "Bran" is Welsh for "raven." Doubles down in Season 6 where he succeeds the title of Three-Eyed Raven.
The Men First: Essentially why he surrenders Winterfell to Theon and Theon's Ironborn men. Bran is hoping for peaceful resolution where no one got hurt. Unfortunately, that is not what happens.
My God, What Have I Done?: Have this reaction when he realized that he unintentionally destroyed Hodor's mind.
He probably wasn't too happy about bringing the Night King and his army down on the home of the previous Three-Eyed Raven either.
My Skull Runneth Over: His mind is overwhelmed by the amount of information he has stored in his mind, to the point it wholly consumes his personality.
Named After the Injury: At the end of the series he is dubbed "Bran the Broken" by Tyrion Lannister, in reference to his paralysis.
The Needs of the Many: Part of his quest to become the Three-Eyed Raven is more or less accepting that most things are irrelevant in the face of the fate of mankind. This is probably why he becomes so emotionally detached when he fully accepts the role: most things are just no longer important to him in light of the Long Night.
Nerves of Steel: Just see the kid in his conversation with Theon after the older boy has taken Winterfell. It completely shatters when Theon is about to kill Ser Rodrik.
Nice Guy: Is following the footsteps of Robb, Jon, and his father in terms of how nice he is.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!:
Bran is ultimately responsible for making Hodor the way he is. In the same episode, Bran's actions inadvertently cause the deaths of the Three Eyed Raven, Summer, several Children of the Forest, and Hodor.
Also, his order to Rickon and Osha to seek refuge with the Umbers ultimately results in them being betrayed and turned over to Ramsay, with both dead by the end of the season.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed: At face value, Bran's position is like that of Edward V of The House of Plantagenet, the endangered Yorkist heir and one of the "Princes in the Tower". The fact that in a very roundabout way, he ended up the default winner of the game of thrones as King of Westeros may as well be a Wish Fulfillment of what would have happened had he survived and reclaimed his position.
No-Sell: Bran has proven himself to be the one person completely immune to Littlefinger's manipulations in any way. He cannot be flattered or manipulated into an emotional response, as he's grown beyond most worldly cares, and simply doesn't care what Littlefinger has to say. In addition, he's spied on Littlefinger before and knows his true character.
Noble Fugitive: Bran has been on the run since he and Rickon escaped from Theon and the Ironmen.
Not So Above It All: After becoming the Three-Eyed Raven, Bran becomes a lot colder, showing almost zero emotion and repeatedly stating that he is far more than just Brandon Stark. He also claims that he has no needs or desires anymore. Despite this, there are instances where he shows dry amusement at trolling people such as Littlefinger or Jaime, both of whom quietly freak out when he throws their iconic quotes back at them. He also shows a slight, but genuine smile when admitting that his wheelchair uses the same design as the one Daeron Targaryen built for his crippled nephew, admitting that he truly liked that one and revealing that he is still capable of feeling emotions such as joy.
Odd Name Out: The only one of Ned Stark's true born sons whose name starts with the letter "B".
Omniscient Hero: As one of the main Stark children since Season 1, he is one of the central heroes, and Season 7, he seems to have acquired a potentially unlimited level of psychic powers, as well as seeing through a thousand eyes and mentally time traveling to witness events, making him effectively omniscient.
Out of Focus: He doesn't appear at all in Season 5, freeing the writers up to focus more on the ever-more spread out other storylines while avoiding doing repetitive scenes of him being instructed by the Three-Eyed Raven.
Outside-Context Problem: Is this for Littlefinger. Despite being a schemer and manipulator with nearly no equal among normal people, Littlefinger could not anticipate an omniscient Stark who could see through his lies and expose his role in instigating the entire conflict, leading to his execution by Arya.
Parental Abandonment: Clearly feels this way about Catelyn's journey to the capital.
Power Trio: Come the end of Season 7, he forms a sibling version with Arya and Sansa during Littlefinger's trial. The three use their respective skillsets to reveal Littlefinger's treacherous actions to the Lords of the North and the Vale then summarily execute him for his crimes.
Psychic Children: It comes with being a Warg.
Psychic Link: While sleeping, Bran can feel what Summer feels. He also once had the same dream as his brother Rickon.
Put on a Bus: Does not appear in Season 5, spending his time training with the Three-Eyed Raven offscreen.
The Quiet One: After becoming the Three-Eyed Raven, he's mostly a silent observer around the others, and has only has very few lines per episode.
Reasonable Authority Figure: Since he's Lord of Winterfell while Robb fights the Lannisters in the Riverlands and Westerlands.
Recurring Dreams: Keeps dreaming about a crow with three eyes. From the books
Secret-Keeper: He's the only other Stark (living, assuming that Benjen himself doesn't know) aware that Jon is actually his Aunt Lyanna's child. At the end of Season 7, he and Samwell Tarly become the only two people on the planet aware that Jon is the rightful heir to the Iron Throne due to being the trueborn son of Rhaegar Targaryen's secret marriage to Lyanna Stark.
Seers: He is a greenseer, after all.
Ship Tease: With Meera since about Season 4. It ends in Season 7, when Meera leaves Bran, since Bran — having became the Three-Eyed Raven — doesn't really care anymore.
The Smart Guy: Later becomes this for the Stark family due to gaining more knowledge and awareness.
Snooping Little Kid: Gets pushed out a window for discovering something he shouldn't while being somewhere he was not expected.
The Stoic: As the Three-Eyed Raven, he never shows any emotion and always has the same expression on his face.
Strong Family Resemblance: He looks a great deal like Ned and Benjen did as kids.
Superman Stays Out of Gotham: In Season 7. As the Three-Eyes Raven, Bran could have outed Littlefinger's crimes to Sansa the moment he returns home to Winterfell, but Bran instead chooses to focus on the fight against the Night King. He leaves Littlefinger to his sisters' hands (eventually literally, by Arya). He also could have used his powers in Season 8 to tell the heroes exactly what Cersei was planning, but chose not to.
Squishy Wizard: Quite literally. His main arsenal is his warging. But being a cripple and the fact that he always has to remain stationary while doing said ability means that he's very vulnerable from attacks.
That Man Is Dead: By Season 7, Bran has grown more and more detached and distant as result of the Three-Eyed Raven giving his powers and memories to Bran. When he and Meera part ways, he pretty much tells her that he's not really Brandon Stark anymore — he remembers what it was like to be Bran, but he "remembers so much else" now. Heartbroken, Meera replies Bran died back in the cave.
Thousand-Yard Stare: After becoming the Three-Eyed Raven, Bran Stark spends a lot of time creepily staring at various characters that arrive at Winterfell. Actor Isaac Hempstead-Wright has stated that in order to achieve the unsettling stare, he removes his contact lenses on set, so he can't actually focus on the person he's staring at. He also stated that his co-star Sophie Turner finds it impressive as he stated that "She said, 'Isaac, your stare is like you're staring into my soul!'".
Took a Level in Badass:
In "The Rains of Castamere", he learns how to warg at will, allowing him to use Summer to attack some Wildlings. And as of "The First of His Name", he uses Hodor to brutally kill Locke. That's right — Arya is no longer the only Stark child with major confirmed kills.
He later becomes the new Three-Eyed Raven when the previous one transfers his talent and knowledge into Bran.
Tragic Dream: He always wanted to be a Kingsguard (Praetorian Knight) when he grew up. His crushed spine hindering this is only second to the realization that everything his father taught him about being an honorable knight was a bold-faced lie.
Troll: He waited an entire day in Winterfell's courtyard just to be the first person Jaime sees upon his arrival. He also throws his "the things we do for love" line back at him during his trial.
Wise Beyond Their Years: For a child, he shows himself far more competent at leading Winterfell than you may expect, and shows that many of the lessons Ned preached have taken root in him. For instance, his justification for leaving Winterfell undefended to send their men to take back Torrhen's Square:
Bran: If we can't protect our own bannermen, why should they protect us?
What the Hell, Hero?: Hodor does this to him, in a Hodor-y sense, after Bran wargs into him in order to kill Locke. After Hodor regains control of his body, he looks at his own bloodstained hands, clearly shocked, and then to Bran, seeming to realize what had happened and is obviously not entirely okay with what Bran just did or what Bran made him do. Hodor isn't really capable of the same level of call-out most characters are, though.
It gets worse when it's revealed that it isn't the first time Bran has invaded Hodor's mind.
You Are in Command Now: In "The Pointy End", Robb heads south for war, making Bran Lord of Winterfell. With Robb's death at the hand of the traitorous Lord Bolton, legally Bran should be the Lord of Winterfell, though he is unaware of this, and the world believes that he is dead and that his sister Sansa is Lady of Winterfell.
Averted when Bran returns to Winterfell in Season 7. As Jon's oldest living brother (as far as anyone knows), he would have the strongest claim to ruling Winterfell in Jon's absence given patriarchal inheritance customs. Sansa, who is nonetheless happy to see him, actually points this out. Bran quickly shuts her down, though, with his justification being that his responsibility as the Three-Eyed Raven overrules any claims he might have had. Later, we find out that he doesn't believe himself to be Bran Stark anymore, anyway.
Played straight at the end of the series when, at Tyrion's suggestion, Westeros' nobility vote for him to be the next king, and name him Bran the Broken. Despite still not wanting power, he accepts the position, and it's implied that he did so because he had foreseen that he would be asked to rule.
Young and in Charge: Commands the respect of virtually everyone under his rule, despite being a crippled ten year old. After Robb dies, he could be considered the true King in the North as the oldest trueborn male Stark. When Bran returns to Winterfell in Season 7, he is referred to as Lord of Winterfell while his half-brother (in reality, his blood cousin) Jon remains King in the North. Bran effectively abdicates lordship to fulfill his role as the Three-Eyed Raven, leaving Sansa as the ruler of Winterfell. The end of Season 8 sees him become the new king of the realm after the rest of the nobility choose him for the position at Tyrion's suggestion.