Action Girl: Oh yes. She's introduced kicking the ass of Loras Tyrell, renowned badass. Even Renly applauds her for her skill as a warrior.
All Love Is Unrequited:
Jaime quickly deduces that she had feelings for Renly.
There is also the very strong hint that she has feelings for Jaime, who explicitly loves Cersei. That said, Jaime has some affection for Brienne, which he has only ever extended to his siblings and children, but circumstances prevent them from pursuing any further relationships. It's blatant enough that Bronn openly ships them the first time he sees them together. And no longer unrequited as of Season 8.
****Ascended Fanboy: Renly offers her anything she desires as a reward for mopping the floor with Loras; Brienne asks for a position on his Kingsguard. In later episodes, she reveals that she was quite sweet on him.
Arch-Enemy: She has said more than once that she wants to kill Stannis for murdering Renly. Stannis, however, isn't even aware of her existence, and at the time of his death, regards Brienne's grudge against him with indifferent amusement rather than dislike.
Armor-Piercing Question: Cersei point-blank asks her if she has romantic feelings for Jaime at the Purple Wedding. While she doesn't answer in the affirmative, her sputtering, deer-in-headlights reaction tells Cersei all she wanted to know.
During their shared bath at Harrenhal, Jaime asks her whether she would have faithfully obeyed her "precious Renly" if he'd ordered her to commit horrible atrocities for no good reason, giving her a shocking but unique insight not only into what "the Kingslayer" did and why, but how "honour" and "good" aren't necessarily the same thing.
Attempted Rape:
By Bolton men in "Walk of Punishment". Since she is no Damsel in Distress, she keeps fighting them off.
"Valar Morghulis" implies that many men have tried this before. Tried being the operative word.
Badass in Distress: For most of Season 3 thanks to Locke and Roose Bolton, culminating in the eponymous scene of "The Bear and the Maiden Fair" where Locke pits her against a bear.
Bears Are Bad News: She had to learn this the hard way in Season 3.
Because You Were Nice to Me: The reason for her crush on Renly, since he's the only man who has shown her kindness and respect. He himself understands how painful it is to be frequently mocked for not adhering to rigid gender roles (Robert and Stannis have bullied Renly for his lack of combat experience and obvious yet unconcealable sexuality), so his empathy towards Brienne's situation allows him to be accepting of her masculinity.
Brienne: He didn't love me, he didn't want me. He danced with me because he didn't want to see me hurt. He saved me from being a joke.
Beleaguered Boss: In Season 4 she ends up with Pod for a squire. Since he's absolutely hopeless at all squire-like tasks, she quickly becomes this trope.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Jaime. They finally sleep together in "The Last of the Starks".
Best Her to Bed Her: Possibly subverted; Jaime Lannister guesses that boys had tried to force themselves onto Brienne when she was young, and suspects that she secretly wanted to find a man who could overpower her. She declines to confirm this, saying only that no one ever could.
Big Damn Heroes: Finally gets her chance to save one of Lady Catelyn's daughters in the Season 6 premiere.
The Big Guy: Brienne is massively tall and muscular, and her status as Action Girl cannot be denied.
Big Sister Mentor: Becomes this for Podrick after she offers to train him in combat.
Black Knight: Despite not technically being a knight until Season 8, Brienne is this in both appearance and effect, quite ironically like Sandor Clegane. Jaime has a suit of black armor forged for her in Season 4, and strictly speaking she no longer follows a master after Catelyn's death until she finds Sansa, much like the black knights of old Europe.
Blatant Lies: When Jaime realizes she had a crush on Renly, she desperately tries to deny it. Jaime doesn't believe her.
Bodyguard Crush: On Renly (a rare gender inversion of the trope), judging from her reaction to his death. She later rues the fact that she only held him once, as he was dying. Jaime later figures it out.
Boyish Short Hair: In contrast to the perfectly coiffed Loras (it must take some time for him to style the unruly curls every morning), Brienne keeps her straight hair short and simple.
Brawn Hilda: Less so than in the books, but she's very large, foreign (as the only heir and retainer of Tarth) and quite unattractive (by Westerosi standards at least).
The Champion: She is this to King Renly, Lady Catelyn, and then to Sansa Stark in Season 6.
Combat Pragmatist: While Brienne seems to dislike playing dirty, she's not afraid of using her sheer size and strength to her advantage, particularly if she finds herself disarmed, as shown with her duels with Loras and, later, Sandor Clegane, who she is ultimately forced to beat to a pulp with her bare hands after being disarmed.
She will also use any advantage she gets, like punching a man in the balls, biting his ear off, clubbing him with a rock, and holding him by his armor and repeatedly punching him so he can't gain the distance to use his sword.
The Comically Serious: As stoic characters on Game of Thrones tend to be.
Composite Character:
In the novels, it was Loras who slew two of Renly's Kingsguard; this role was transferred to Brienne on the show.
Takes Mors "Crowfood" Umber's role as the person who picks up Ramsay's bride (Jeyne Poole in the books, Sansa in the show).
Cool Helmet: She wears an antlered helm in "Garden of Bones" when she accompanies Renly to his parley with Stannis.
Cool Sword: Jaime presents her with the Valyrian steel sword his father had made for him from half of Ice, which she names Oathkeeper. Once she swears to Sansa, Ice returns to the North... partially.
Courtly Love: Gender-flipped with her and Renly. She is a devoted knight who will do anything for her beloved king, and she is resigned to the fact that he will never return her feelings.
The Cynic: In the books, she was more naive and relatively innocent, while the show hints at a more jaded, cynical personality. For instance, she's under no illusions about Jaime surviving the night after his escape attempt, when she happens upon three hanged victims of the Stark army she's saddened but by no means surprised, and she manages to spin a fairly convincing cover story for herself and Jaime on the spot when confronted by hostile soldiers.
Daddy's Girl: She recalls her father in both "The Children" and "The High Sparrow", smiling fondly whenever she mentions him.
Death Glare: She gives Jaime a very menacing one in "Dark Wings, Dark Words" when he goes way overboard with the gay jokes about Renly. She also shoots daggers from her eyes when the Kingslayer insults her for being unable to protect her king in "Kissed by Fire." Lampshaded in "Beyond the Wall".
Sandor: You're with Brienne of fucking Tarth?
Tormund: Well... not with her yet. But I see the way she looks at me.
Sandor: How does she look at you? Like she wants to carve you up and eat your liver?
Tormund: You do know her!
Declaration of Protection:
Faithfully serving Renly as a member of his Kingsguard is Brienne's quiet way of expressing her (unrequited) love for him.
After a long quest to seek her out, she officially takes oaths of knightly service to Sansa.
Defiant to the End: Whether it's being dragged off to be gang-raped or facing off against a bear with only a wooden sword, Brienne will never, ever go down without a fight.
Defrosting Ice Queen: To Podrick, as she didn't want a squire, so she often berates him. She does eventually come to respect his loyalty and apologises for being harsh towards him, however.
Did Not Think This Through:
Went to "save" Arya Stark... who believes her whole family is dead or prisoner of the Lannisters... with a Lannister-customized sword, a Westerlands squire, and a non-Northerner accent. What Could Possibly Go Wrong??
Decides to fulfill her oath to kill Stannis instead of protecting Sansa. Of course, Stannis dying will keep the Boltons in control of the North meaning Sansa continues to be in danger. She manages to rescue Sansa just in time from Bolton men after escaping on her own from Winterfell, but it was a close-run thing and had it not been for Theon, she and Pod would have failed.
Died in Your Arms Tonight: Renly dies in her arms after being stabbed by Melisandre's shadow-son. Brienne later tells Catelyn that this was the only time she was ever able to hold him.
Do Wrong, Right: Her father, Lord Selwyn Tarth, was upset at her belligerent attitude to all her potential suitors and eventually shrugged and had Brienne given formal training as a knight, reasoning if she is going to get in fights and beat people up, she might as well do it right.
Don't Call Me "Sir": Does not like to be called "Lady" Brienne, although as the daughter and only heir of the Lord of Tarth she is indeed officially a lady. Yet as she's not a knight, she can't be called Ser either ...until Jaime knights her in Season 8.
The Dulcinea Effect: Despite knowing Catelyn Stark for a very short time, Brienne almost immediately pledges her allegiance to her and spends a huge portion of the show's runtime trying to track down and protect Catelyn's daughters. Even after Catelyn, is killed, Brienne is still determined to see this task through.
Earn Your Happy Ending: After eight seasons, Brienne not only comes out alive at the end of the series, but is officially made a knight and ends up as the Commander of the Kingsguard of King Brandon Stark.
Epic Flail: She wields a flail during her melee with Loras.
Establishing Character Moment: Defeats Loras in their duel using her size and strength, spear-tackling him to the ground.
Everyone Can See It: How she feels about Renly, and later on, how Jaime feels about her.
Bronn: I'd fuck her. You'd fuck her, wouldn't you?
Podrick: I'm her squire.
Bronn: Oh. (speaking about Jaime) Well he'd fuck her, that's for sure. And she'd fuck him, don't you think? The way she looks at him.
Failure Knight: How she feels about herself after the deaths of Renly Baratheon and later, Catelyn Stark, neither of whom she was in a position to protect. Littlefinger even points out her inability to protect either of them in "The House of Black and White." This changes by the middle of Season 6, where Jaime praises her for succeeding in fulfilling her oath.
Fire-Forged Friends: With Jaime and Pod, eventually. Also with Sansa, who becomes friendly with Brienne after she rescues her.
Foil:
She is this to the Hound. Brienne has a lofty notion of chivalry and honor, aspiring to be respected as a knight, while Sandor does nothing but spit on the notion that knightly honor exists. Both are former Kingsguard members; Brienne is still loyal to Renly even after his death, but the Hound deserts Joffrey during the Battle of Blackwater. Neither character carries the title "Ser," although in Brienne's case, she's not entitled to it because of her gender. Brienne searches for Sansa because she wants uphold her vow to keep the girl safe, whereas Sandor only keeps Arya by his side so that he can sell her to Lysa for money. This becomes very evident during their confrontation and duel at the end of Season 4.
To Tyrion. Brienne is big, Tyrion is small, and they are both outcasts because of their physiques. They both are given mocking nicknames because of it and both cannot fulfill their respective expected gender roles in society: a dainty lady and a dashing knight. Tyrion has his brains to make up for it, Brienne has her brawn — and their brilliance goes unacknowledged by almost everyone. They are both considered somewhat embarrassing offspring by their fathers, but Brienne's was loving or open-minded enough to help her become a competent fighter, while Tywin did nothing to nurture Tyrion's talents. They don't get to interact, but they both fill the role of Jaime's Morality Pet, and Podrick served as a squire to both of them.
To Arya. They both end up as renowned warrior women in a world where that's unusual, but Brienne does so by embodying her culture's idea of what a warrior should be better than most men, while Arya has entirely gone her own way and become an assassin and Combat Pragmatist.
Friendless Background: She is ostracized by Westerosi society due to her unattractiveness, large size, and her pursuit of a traditionally masculine occupation.
Full-Frontal Assault: Does this to Jaime in Harrenhal's baths when he mocks her failure to protect Renly. It's very sudden and powerful.
Jaime: That was unworthy. Forgive me. You protected me better than most.
Good Scars, Evil Scars: Like Tyrion, she ends up inverting this after Locke's bear leaves her with a nasty-looking set of massive claw scars on her neck.
Groin Attack:
She drives her sword through the crotch of a murdering rapist Northerner in "Valar Morghulis".
During her brawl with Sandor Clegane, she delivers a brutal punch to his balls... which he immediately responds to by delivering an equally brutal kick between her legs.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: She's the gender-flip version of the heroic male characters that typically fall under this trope.
Has a Type: Between her hopeless love for Renly, the Belligerent Sexual Tension between her and Jaime, and her complete disinterest in Tormund, it seems Brienne's tastes run towards pretty, well-groomed, high-born men more so than rugged ones.
Heartbroken Badass: She becomes this after Renly's assassination.
Heroic BSoD: She experiences this when Renly is slain before eyes. Catelyn manages to snap her out of it in time to flee Renly's camp.
Honor Before Reason: Displays Undying Loyalty to an extreme. Continues to serve Catelyn Stark even after her death. Becomes a fault of hers as she's so committed to protecting the Stark children, she couldn't simply let Arya be with the Hound. She ends up supposedly killing the Hound and losing track of Arya, meaning Arya's all on her own now.
Hypocrite:
Tells Stannis she's killing him in the name of Renly the rightful King... even though Stannis clearly had more right to the throne then Renly, and if he hadn't killed Renly they probably would have killed him.
Later, Brienne tells Sansa not to trust Davos for supporting Stannis and cites the fact he wasn't with Stannis to show his disloyalty. However, Davos was away on Stannis' orders and by this logic Brienne was disloyal to Catelyn for not being with her when she was murdered. In fact, she comes across as worse by this logic, as rather then remaining to protect Sansa she went off to murder Stannis and it was only luck that enabled her to save Sansa.
Iconic Sequel Character: She does not appear in the series until Season 2.
I Let Gwen Stacy Die: There was absolutely nothing she could do to defend her beloved king Renly against Melisandre's black magic, but she nevertheless feels horrible that she couldn't save him. She later feels this way about Lady Catelyn, who she similarly couldn't save because she was performing a task given by her and wasn't at the Twins at the time of the Red Wedding.
Incompatible Orientation: With Renly.
In-Series Nickname: Brienne the Beauty, an Ironic Nickname.
Insistent Terminology: She is no "Lady". And you know what, she's also not a knight (since women can't officially be knights, even though she has the skill of one and adheres to the knightly code of honor better than most). She keeps insisting she's not a knight right up to the moment Jaime knights her in Season 8. note 
Ironic Nickname: Brienne the Beauty. The men consider her to be unattractive. Subverted or zig zagged depending on your point of view as of "Kissed by Fire", when she's revealed to be extremely good looking underneath all that armor, dirt, and sweat.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Brienne is honourable to a fault but can be quite unpleasant to be around if you're an enemy of Renly or a Non-Action Guy. She softens up towards Jaime and Pod however.
Kicking Ass in All Her Finery: Locke throws her into the bear pit at Harrenhal with nothing but a wooden sword and that ugly pink dress, and from the look of things she was holding her own rather well against the bear before Jaime showed up, but still in serious danger.
Knight Errant: She's heading progressively into Black Knight territory (as in the Real Life masterless, landless black knights) after the deaths of Renly Baratheon and Catelyn Stark.
Knight in Shining Armor: Along with Barristan Selmy and Loras Tyrell, she comes the closest to being one. She's dedicated, an excellent fighter, unwaveringly loyal, protective of the weak, noble, and good-hearted. In Season 8, just before the Great Battle of Winterfell, Jaime citing the gender-neutral ambiguity of the precedent "any knight can make a knight", knights her for real. She arises as 'Ser Brienne of Tarth, Knight of the Seven Kingdoms', becoming a knight for real in front of witnesses. She ultimately ends up serving as Lord Commander of the Kingsguard, the order that is seen in-universe to be the epitome of this trope.
Knight in Sour Armor: She becomes this after she is unable to save Renly from a monstrous Living Shadow.
The Lad-ette: A big part of her character is that she's very much "one of the boys" in the less-than-progressive Westeros. In "The Lion and the Rose", she bows to Joffrey and Margaery instead of performing a curtsy. When Cersei inquires about this odd behavior, Brienne explains that she could never master the curtsy.
Lady and Knight:
A gender inversion where she is the strong, brave warrior who is sworn to protect the handsome and gentle King Renly.
After Renly is assassinated, Brienne then serves the gracious Lady Catelyn (a same-sex variation). Then she serves Catelyn's daughter Sansa.
Returns to the gender-inversion at the end of the series, serving as the Commander of Bran's Kingsguard.
Lady Looks Like a Dude: Jaime (who is both shorter and considered to be way prettier than she) thinks she's far too masculine-looking for a woman.
Lie Back and Think of England: A very dark version of this trope is presented when Jaime suggests to Brienne that she think of Renly when her would-be rapists have their way with her. Jaime knows that Brienne will be killed if she resists.
Lightning Bruiser: Both very big and strong (the actress who plays her is 6'3" in real life) and very fast (after losing her weapon in the melee, she is able to defeat Loras by ducking inside his defenses and tackling him to the ground before he can bring his weapon to bear to defend himself).
Love Hurts: Although Renly did not return her feelings, she is still mourning for him in Season 4. She and Jaime have a deep respect and maybe a little yearning for each other, but are technically on different sides of the war, and there is the matter of Jaime's relationship Cersei, who is herself very dangerous.
Love Triangle: Happens multiple times for Brienne, in all sorts of ways.
She is in love with Renly, but he and Loras have already been a romantic couple for years, and she doesn't believe in any of the gossip surrounding them. While Renly is aware that Brienne is very loyal to him, it's unclear on the show if he ever suspected that she fancied him.
Later, Brienne and Cersei both have strong feelings for Jaime. Jaime is in love and in a relationship with Cersei, but he also has some kind of mutual attraction to and Belligerent Sexual Tension with Brienne. Cersei notices this and takes a dislike to Brienne.
And by series end, Tormund has a huge crush on Brienne, but she considers him to be an Abhorrent Admirer and clearly loves Jaime, who does have feelings for her on some level but is currently with Cersei, whom he loves. However, in Season 8, Jaime has left Cersei, leaving Jaime to compete for Brienne's attention with Tormund. Tormund is obviously jealous of Jaime's and Brienne's chemistry together and is heartbroken when she chooses Jaime over him, and Jaime, for his part, makes a remark about Tormund that Brienne notes makes him sound jealous, too. Jaime and Brienne finally act on their mutual feelings and get together (even though it doesn't last), to Tormund's heartbreak.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy:
She and Renly are specifically the Action Girl and Non-Action Guy pairing. Brienne adores Renly because his sweet and caring nature is so different from the malicious, violent men that she has encountered in her life. Renly is fond of Brienne (to the point where Loras is even a bit jealous of her) because he admires a woman who, despite the numerous obstacles she has faced in her pursuit of a masculine occupation, is able to beat the formidable Knight of Flowers in the melee.
She plays the Masculine Girl to Loras' Feminine Boy while they serve as Renly's bodyguards. She's a Brawn Hilda who is perceived in-universe as a Lady Looks Like a Dude, while Loras is a Pretty Boy with some Camp Gay tendencies.
Master Swordsman: She's the winner of Renly's tourney, defeating all opponents, including the Knight of Flowers — who's taken on the Mountain and the Kingslayer and won. She quickly takes down the members of Renly's Kingsguard who try to kill her, and even the Kingslayer seems impressed when he first sees her in action. Come Season 3, she easily defeats Jaime. Granted, he was wearing manacles at the time and somewhat out-of-practice, but it's still no mean feat, particularly since near the end of their engagement, she actually looked slightly bored. She also beat Sandor Clegane, who himself is one of the few people who can match his brother, The Mountain.
Meaningful Look: After she is appointed to his Kingsguard, Renly winks at her◊ as he applauds to further communicate his warmth and reassurance that he's on her side, regardless of his followers' unfavourable opinion.
My Greatest Failure: She perceives her failure to protect Renly from a magical Humanoid Abomination as this.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: In her attempt to protect Arya Stark, she ends up (supposedly) killing Sandor Clegane, the only person left that was keeping Arya safe. And to top things off, she loses track of Arya.
No Guy Wants an Amazon:
Brienne is a victim of this; the reason why she's in love with Renly is because he's the only man who recognizes her worth as a human being and a warrior, and does not judge her based on her appearance or gender.
Jaime suggests that, given her physicality and her affront to the rigid patriarchal structure of Westeros, more than a few men must have tried to rape her out of spite. Brienne replies, "one or two tried."
Averted in Season 6 when Tormund is shown to be very attracted to her. Poor Brienne doesn't know what to make of it, especially since Tormund's version of flirting is nothing short of awkward and hilarious.
Further averted when she and Pod come to Riverrun and meet with Jaime. Bronn comments that "I'd fuck her" and goes on to observe that "[Jaime]'d fuck her, that's for sure."
Not in This for Your Revolution:
A curious example in that while Brienne altruistically upholds oaths and enters services of people she respects and admires, she limits her loyalty to personal relations rather than the causes they espouse, and is more keen on personal commitment than beliefs in said individual's values and goals:
She swears an oath to Renly who saw himself as a benign alternative to Stannis and Joffrey, and later to Catelyn Stark who also opposes Joffrey. Yet after Renly's and Catelyn's deaths, she somehow doesn't see anything contradictory in hanging around King's Landing among the Lannisters (the very people who ordered Catelyn's death) and not only attending the royal wedding but personally greeting Joffrey, who Renly and Catelyn hated. This does bite her later, when Sansa calls her out on her chumminess with the Lannisters at Joffrey's wedding and questions her loyalty to her mother, on their first encounter.
Her vendetta against Stannis is such that she doesn't take into account the fact that at the time of his death, Stannis was fighting the Boltons and seeking to liberate Winterfell (which technically puts her and Stannis on the same side). She deserts her post to fulfill her oath to Renly, who she calls the rightful king Because You Were Nice to Me and she had sworn an oath to him rather than any legal principles. She takes this even further when she arrives at Castle Black and, despite taking revenge on Stannis, insults both Davos and Melisandre even when they are on the same side, going as far as taunting them about Stannis's death and trying to turn Sansa against them.
When she meets Jaime Lannister at the Siege of Riverrun, she doesn't raise the fact that Jaime is marching alongside the Freys, the same people who slit the throat of Catelyn Stark and committed the Red Wedding. She lets it slide because she is friendly with Jaime, and she does admit that she doesn't look forward to actually meeting him in battle, hoping to fulfill the letter of her oath to Sansa while keeping her friendship with Jaime intact, despite the fact that Sansa is an enemy and fugitive of the Crown (as Jaime points out). If necessary, however, she'd have had to fight him.
Not So Stoic: She generally keeps her calm, even when slicing down a gang of murdering rapists. However, when she witnesses Renly's murder or is dragged off to be raped by some Bolton bannermen, she starts to scream.
The Oath-Breaker: Played With; She swore two oaths: to keep Cat's children safe and to kill Stannis. By deciding to abandon her vigil to wait for a signal from Sansa, instead deciding to go after Stannis, she basically broke her first vow. Strictly speaking she upheld the letter, if not the intent; Sansa had released her from her oath to the Starks, and her original vow to Catelyn had a specific exemption that it would not hold her back from persuing Stannis. She manages to uphold her first oath by rescuing Sansa from Bolton hunters shortly after her escape from Winterfell, and after Arya's and Bran's return to Winterfell, she has fulfilled her oaths.
Off with His Head!: It's implied that she decapitates Stannis judging by the movement of her arms.
Pay Evil unto Evil: Further evidencing the darker take on her character in comparison to that in the books, in which she had never killed a man before. She seems to have no issue doing this when a trio of rapist Stark soldiers confront her and Jaime on the way to King's Landing, absolutely wrecking two of them before killing the ringleader by driving her sword through his crotch, making a point of killing him as slowly and painfully as possible.
Brienne: Two quick deaths. (castration)
Pink Means Feminine: The dress Roose Bolton's men find for her to wear whilst at Harrehal is a very loud shade of pink. She looks like she's just waiting for the opportunity to murder whoever put her in it the entire time she's wearing it. From the books
Promotion to Opening Titles: Starting Season 4.
Rank Up: Becomes Lord Commander of the Kingsguard in the series finale.
Relationship Upgrade: After several seasons of Unresolved Belligerent Sexual Tension, Jaime and Brienne finally get together in Season 8's "The Last of the Starks". Brienne loses her virginity to Jaime, and she is the only woman Jaime's ever slept with besides his twin sister. Sadly, though, it only lasts until the end of this episode before Jaime leaves to return to King's Landing.
Remember When You Blew Up a Sun?: Her beating the shit out of the Hound is heralded as one of her crowning achievemnts by other characters in the show and is ultimately one of the feats that least to Jaime knighting her.
Revenge: She swears vengeance against Stannis for slaying Renly. She finally takes it in the Season 5 finale.
Rescue Romance: Serious Jaime/Brienne Ship Tease starts from when Jaime (without a weapon) leaps into a bearpit to rescue her.
Samus Is a Girl: Very briefly. Her gender isn't clear to viewers until Renly asks her to remove her helmet; when she does it elicits gasps from the crowd.
Saying Too Much: In "Two Swords," after she calls Renly "our king" while speaking to Margaery, the Tyrell lady gently, but sternly, reminds Brienne that Joffrey is king now. Brienne would get her head chopped off if Joffrey ever found out that she is still faithful to Renly's memory.
Screaming Warrior: Whenever she fights a powerful opponent she tends to let out pretty intimidating roars and shots of anger. In her fight against Sandor Clegane she punctuates beating the shit out of him with a rock by screaming with rage non-stop.
Secret-Keeper: She's the only other person who knows the truth about why Jaime murdered Aerys Targaryen.
Second Love: For Jaime, with Cersei being the first. Jaime himself is this for her, as she originally loved Renly.
She Cleans Up Nicely: While the gaudy pink gown doesn't suit her well, she still looks somewhat pretty in it, which is more than we can say for her book counterpart. In the novels, the pink dress makes Brienne seem more unattractive. Suffice it to say the leather tunic and blue riding skirt she wears during her time in King's Landing suit her far better.
She Is the King: In the grand finale, she becomes the Lord Commander of the Kingsguard.
Shield Bash: She hits Loras' helm-covered head with her shield in the melee, but he recovers from the blow.
Shields Are Useless: Her shield isn't of much help in the melee, as Loras causes enough damage to it with his axe that she is forced to discard it during their fight.
So Proud of You: How she feels about Arya during Season 7, as she says to the Hound.
Brienne: The only one who needs protecting is the one who gets in her way.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: Strong Girl to Renly's Smart Guy. Brienne is a Master Swordsman, while Renly is a Non-Action Guy but skilled in politics.
Subordinate Excuse: She is the sole surviving child of Lord Selwyn Tarth (and therefore his heiress), but she neglects whatever duties she presumably has in her home city in favour of dedicating her whole life to protecting King Renly, whom she has feelings for. What makes Brienne's devotion quite remarkable is that, as a woman, she herself isn't obligated — or even expected — to physically fight for Renly when he summons his Stormlands bannermen (which House Tarth is a part of) to his cause.
Tomboy and Girly Girl:
With Catelyn. Lampshaded by Brienne herself when she comments that Cat has courage, "not battlefield courage, perhaps, but a woman's kind of courage..."
This trope also applies when she interacts with Margaery.
With Sansa too in Season 6.
True Beauty Is on the Inside: She is the epitome of this trope. Only Renly, Catelyn, Olenna, and later Sansa are able to look past Brienne's unappealing physique and see her inner beauty. Ironically, the person who probably knows this best is a man who should be her enemy, Jaime Lannister.
Undying Loyalty: A double example and this almost leads to disaster. She remains dedicated to King Renly even after he dies, swearing to avenge him. When Jaime insults Renly's homosexuality one too many times, she becomes furious and forcefully grabs Jaime's head, looking like she wants to kill him. Brienne's vow to bring the prisoner to King's Landing alive is the only thing that prevented her from carrying out her wish. She still refers to Renly as her king in "Two Swords." At the same time, Brienne swore loyalty to Catelyn Stark directly after Renly's death and vowed to retrieve her daughters and protect her. She points out to Jaime "I dont serve House Stark, I serve Lady Catelyn". Later, she still insists on bringing Sansa and Arya to safety after Catelyn's death.
Vitriolic Best Buds: She becomes one with Jaime. She also settles into this with Podrick, who is exclusively on the receiving end, but she still values his loyalty.
White Stallion: As befitting a Knight in Shining Armor, Brienne rides a white horse in "Garden of Bones."
Will Not Be a Victim: Unlike most women about to be raped by soldiers, she really can fight back.
Worf Had the Flu: Not her, but her victories against two of the most formidable fighters in Westeros (Jaime and Sandor) took place when they both were weakened by illness or another similar disadvantage.
Wrestler in All of Us: Brienne is known to use her brute strength to tackle her foes when at a disadvantage. It's how she defeated Loras in a tournament duel, and also how one of the Bolton men pursuing Sansa met his end (and she also tackled the man's horse down too).
You Can't Go Home Again: Renly Baratheon and Catelyn Stark are dead. Brienne doesn't have much of a home left, at least until Sansa takes her in.