Anti-Villain: One of the greatest schemers in the show (besting Tyrion, Varys, and Littlefinger, and challenging Tywin), murders a child, and taunts the child's father over it... and in every situation, she still seems to have the moral highground over her enemies (and usually audience sympathy).
Aw, Look! They Really Do Love Each Other:
"Breaker of Chains" reveals that despite her complaints about her late husband's stupidity, she was nevertheless somewhat fond of him, as she is visibly upset (her eyes are even a bit wet) while reminiscing about the day he died. In "Oathkeeper", Olenna recounts to Margaery that Luthor Tyrell was supposed to marry Olenna's sister while Olenna was intended for a Targaryen. However, Olenna decided she preferred Luthor to the Targaryen and seduced him away from her sister on the eve of their betrothal. While this was likely a political move, it at least shows that Olenna had some regard for her husband, once upon a time.
She may look down on her son for being an oaf, but she is clearly upset when he along with her grandchildren were killed by Cersei's wildfire plot.
Badass Boast: Gives a nice one to Littlefinger in "The Gift" — "If I should meet with some unfortunate accident here at your broken little flesh market... they'll never even find what's left of you."
Badass Bureaucrat: The Tyrells are the primary food provider for the Seven Kingdoms because of the fertile lands they successfully administrate, especially since Olenna's time. Her family are richest nobles after the Lannisters (eventually the de-facto richest, though it doesn't become public knowledge). See the main quote about the House Tyrell's war expenses in Olenna's own words.
Benevolent Boss: In "Two Swords", she motivates her handmaidens by rewarding the one who finds the best necklace for Margaery with the second-best necklace.
Brief Accent Imitation: Whilst discussing the various family house mottos, she briefly adopts a Northern accent when pointing out how the Stark's "Winter is Coming" sounds inherently more badass than the Tyrells' "Growing Strong."
Brutal Honesty: Practices this because she can get away with it on account on her age and power — and encourages Sansa to speak her mind about Joffrey.
Cassandra Truth: She warned her family not to back Renly, whom she considered a terrible candidate with an unjust claim on the throne, and lamenting that it got them into a jam that they had to get out of by engaging Margaery with Joffrey, which ended up entangling House Tyrell's fortunes with those of House Lannister, whom she despises. In the end she laments being the last of her family.
Character Death: In "The Queen's Justice". Via poison that she willingly ingests.
The Chessmaster: Most definitely. When Sansa speaks her mind to Margaery and Olenna about Joffrey (the girl tells them that he's "a monster"), the wheels in Olenna's mind visibly begin to turn, figuring out how to keep her granddaughter safe. This, in turn, leads to her poisoning Joffrey, with Tyrion and Sansa framed for it. The duo worked to spirit Sansa out of King's Landing, but Tyrion escaped by other own means.
Cold Ham: Much like Tywin, Olenna remains soft-spoken and sarcastic while commanding every scene she's in.
Complexity Addiction: The High Sparrow calls out how a lifetime of double-dealing and sussing out hidden motives has left her completely stymied when dealing with someone like him whose motivations really are as simple as they appear.
Composite Character: She takes over Book Mace's role of coming back to the capital and attempting to free Margaery.
The Consigliere: To her son Mace, and to her granddaughter Margaery.
The Conspiracy: Leads one, which includes Petyr Baelish, Ser Dontos Hollard, and (unknowingly) Sansa, and which resulted in Joffrey's death by poisoning and Tyrion and Sansa's framing for the deed.
Cool Old Lady: To her grandchildren, Margaery and Loras. And to Sansa, and even to some degree to Varys. And of course to the audience. Given her largely egalitarian attitudes towards gender, sexuality and use of political power, she may well be the most socially progressive person on the series besides Renly (with Tyrion Lannister running a somewhat distant third).
Deadpan Snarker: The Queen of Thorns is famously sharp-tongued. She gets away with these constant jibes at powerful people partly because she's Tyrell matriarch and partly because of her age.
Death Glare: Gives a particularly vicious one to Cersei in "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken" after Loras and Margaery are arrested by the Faith Militant.
Death Seeker: It's implied in the Season 6 finale that Olenna has crossed into this after Cersei wipes out her entire family:
Olenna: Cersei stole the future from me. She killed my son. She killed my grandson. She killed my granddaughter. It is not survival I am after.
Defiant to the End: In inimitable form, Olenna spits Jaime's mercy right back in his face by admitting to Joffrey's murder in her final moments.
Despair Event Horizon: If the deaths of her family members didn't make her cross it, then the fall of Highgarden to the Lannisters did.
****Demoted to Extra: While still memorable, her role in Season 5 is significantly less substantial then in the previous two seasons — she only appears in two episodes midway through the season, and doesn't even appear in the finale. This is rectified in the following season.
Didn't See That Coming: Ever since she started playing the Game, she's made one constant but fatal mistake — underestimating Cersei Lannister, or rather overestimating in this case. In all their dealings, Olenna assumes Cersei, despite her pettiness, knows when to quit. It never seems to dawn on her, even when the proof is staring her in the face, that there is no length Cersei won't go to keep herself in power, no matter how shortsighted. After Cersei murders her entire family, Olenna is no longer dismissive of her.
Olenna: Your sister has done things... I was incapable of imagining. That was my prize mistake... a failure of imagination.
Dirty Old Woman:
Best exemplified by this conversation with Varys.
Olenna: Are you here to seduce me?
Varys: A little obvious perhaps...
Olenna: Oh no please, seduce away! It's been so long. But I rather think it's all for naught; what happens when the non-existent bumps against the decrepit (Varys looks down at his groin and up again in shock)... a question for the philosophers.
She also seems rather fond of reminiscing about how she seduced Margaery's grandfather and ended up fucking him so hard that he couldn't walk for a day, before remarking how she was "very, very good" at it. All of which she happily tells her granddaughter.
Dispense with the Pleasantries: Olenna often has no patience for pomp and circumstance, and dismisses any pleasantries or attempts at flattery. Especially from the people she doesn't like. A notable example is when she tells off Littlefinger's attempt at being courteous in "The Gift" when they meet at his brothel.
Littlefinger: [referring to his trashed brothel] I'm sorry about the locale.
Olenna: No you're not.
Littlefinger: It seemed like the safest place.
Olenna: [observing the devastation the Faith Militant left in their wake] Not for your clientele, clearly. [...]You've always been rather impressed with yourself, haven't you?
Littlefinger: The past is the past. The future is all that's worth discussing, the future of House Tyrell-
Olenna: Don't pretend to have any concern for my House, my grandchildren or me! I should have known you'd return to the capital as soon as things started to go wrong!
Driven to Suicide: When Highgarden falls to the Lannisters, Jaime hands her a painless poison, which she willingly drinks without a beat.
Dying Alone: She ends up dying alone in her chambers of a poison when Jaime storms out of her room after her Dying Moment of Awesome. She doesn't really mind.
Dying Moment of Awesome: An unusually understated case, as she lets Jaime make a big deal about how he talked Cersei out of putting her through a tortuous public death in favor of a quick and painless poison, and only after taking it reveals that she was the one responsible for Joffrey's gruesome murder, leaving Jaime robbed of any satisfaction from his act of mercy.
Entertainingly Wrong: The closest thing she has to a flaw is her occasional tendency to overestimate her opponents, which is rare for a setting with so many Smug Snakes.
She initially assumes Margaery would be safe with Joffrey because Joffrey would have nothing to gain by hurting her, but when it turns out he's just a psychopath she's forced to move against him quickly.
She assumes Cersei wouldn't move against the Tyrell family because she is not in a position to do so, but she does not account for Cersei being dumb enough to do it anyways. She assumes Cersei is doing it because she has an actual plan to extort House Tyrell, but it's actually mostly just because Cersei is having a petty feud with Margaery and can't really be reasoned with.
She assumes the High Sparrow wants wealth, but he really is just a fanatic who wants to establish a theocracy.
Everyone Has Standards: Her stern face shows that she does not hide her distaste for Joffrey's dreadful "reenactment" of the War of the Five Kings. Then again, it involves Joffrey insulting her grandson, Loras, being portrayed as Renly's mount to mock their relationship.
Expy: An old woman killing a king by poisoning very publicly at a grand ceremony is very similar to Countess Mahaut D’Artois killing baby Jean II at his christening in The Accursed Kings. That series is Martin’s self-described inspiration for this franchise.
Face Death with Dignity: Olenna Tyrell goes out with all the composure and grace we've come to expect from her— she downs the poison offered to her, and spends her last minutes insulting Jamie and Cersei by extension, including revealing that she was the one who killed Joffrey. All while maintaining perfect regal posture in her chair. Her final moments are also not shown to the viewer to hammer the point.
Fatal Flaw: Her age. For all her intelligence, Olenna was very stubborn and never listened to anyone and only did things her way while rarely sharing her thoughts, even hiding her role in Joffrey's poisoning from Margaery; this ends up costing her house's extinction and death. As she didn't even bother sharing info on Casterly Rock being dried, came back to Highgarden herself to mobilize her troops.
First-Name Basis: Towards the end of her conversation with Tywin in "The Lion and the Rose", she calls him by his first name without his title, and Tywin doesn't even blink an eye. Who else gets away with that without receiving Tywin's signature Death Glare?
Foil:
She is, politically, the diametric opposite of Tywin Lannister, being a powerful progressive force in Westeros as opposed to Tywin's brand of stern patriarchical conservatism. Margaery has blossomed under her grandmother's guidance, whereas Cersei has suffocated under her father's psychological abuse. While Olenna teases her son and grandson, her verbal jabs are nowhere near as cruel as Tywin's horrid treatment of Tyrion and there's still a strong sense of mutual affection between them. When Olenna arranges a marriage for Loras, she betrothes him to Sansa not only for the girl's claim to Winterfell, but also because she knows that Loras's personality — if not his orientation — is compatible with Sansa's and he will treat her right. When Tywin arranges marriages for Tyrion and Cersei, he's only concerned about political gain, and doesn't give a rat's ass about his children's objections or feelings and makes clear he expects Tyrion to get Sansa pregnant, by any means necessary. Both Olenna and Tywin have no problem with having homosexual soldiers in their armies but whereas Tywin considers homosexuality a mental illness, Olenna believes it's perfectly natural. In short, Olenna absorbed two crucial lessons Tywin never did: The importance of a family being genuinely close and loving and the importance of a good image and not being hated.
Here's what they share in common: while their offspring technically have a higher rank (Queen Regent Cersei, King Joffrey, Lord Paramount Mace Tyrell), it's Tywin and Olenna who hold all the power in the Lannister-Tyrell alliance. And both were involved in the assassination of a king at a wedding.
She is what Cersei tried to be, but completely failed at; a matriarch who rules a family by guiding and manipulating her children. Unlike Cersei, Olenna is intelligent enough to pull it off. Also, she has the advantage that her (grand)children are sane, and, at least in the case of Margaery, smart enough to listen to her.
Frame-Up: Her conspiracy with Petyr Baelish leads to Tyrion and Sansa's framing for Joffrey's murder.
Friendly Enemy: She and Tywin have this dynamic despite his twisting of her arm over the arranged marriage between Loras and Cersei. Olenna tries to cheer up the cranky old man after Joffrey and Margaery's wedding ceremony.
Guile Hero: Olenna describes herself as decrepit, but she is easily one of the most cunning and dangerous characters in the show. She is also generally on the side of the most kind-hearted characters, even if her methods are sometimes horrifying.
Grande Dame: Lady Olenna is an elegant dame of ample physique, a widow of a Henpecked Husband and famous for her arrogance, though she is not humourless, being famous for her dry wit.
Grumpy Old Man: If she's snarking more relentlessly than usual, it either means she's pissed or losing patience.
How They Treat the Help: Played with. She is often shown to be very cheeky to her household (and frankly, to anybody), but always in a benevolent way.
Hypocritical Humor: A very dark example at Joffrey's wedding. "What kind of monster would murder a man at his own wedding day?" A fiercely protective grandmother, apparently. Though her motivations to save her grandchildren from a known psychopath are far more sympathetic than Tywin's rationale for the Red Wedding.
In-Series Nickname: She is known as the "Queen of Thorns" for her sarcasm and wit, combined with the rose thorns being the sigil of House Tyrell.
Insult Backfire: After a gambit to overthrow the High Sparrow fails, she mockingly asks Cersei if she plans to kill all of her enemies. While Cersei doesn't kill all of enemies, she comes pretty dang close.
I Was Quite a Looker: It's strongly implied that she was very attractive in her youth. Considering that her actress is Diana Rigg (who was a sex symbol in the 1960's), and Olenna is naturally charismatic, it's no surprise at all. This is later confirmed when she recalls seducing her future husband the night before he was supposed to propose to her elder sister.
Jerkass Has a Point: While telling Daenerys to ignore Tyrion's advice was a bit of a dick move, Olenna did have a point especially in hindsight. A lot of Tyrion's advice for Dany only served to screw her over in the long run. His advice to besiege Casterly Rock instead of King's Landing cost Dany her allies (including Olenna herself). His suggestion to establish a truce with Cersei by capturing a wight cost Dany her dragon Viserion, whom the Night King uses to destroy the wall that kept the armies of the dead at bay, ensuring that the invasion comes ahead of schedule. Not to mention that the entire plan was All for Nothing as Cersei secretly proceeds to violate the truce anyway.
Kick the Dog: Killing Joffrey? Fair enough. Making Tyrion and Sansa The Scapegoat? Probably necessary, but still not cool, Olenna. Especially since moments ago she gave her condolences to Sansa over the loss of her brother and mother at the Red Wedding.
Laser-Guided Karma:
At the end of Season 6, she laments about how Cersei murdered her son and her grandchildren and ended the House Tyrell. Two seasons earlier, Olenna murdered Cersei's son Joffrey and had the innocent Tyrion Lannister as The Scapegoat, which quickly led to the effective end of House Lannister in King's Landing, with Tywin and Tyrion eliminated and Cersei pushed further into madness. So while Cersei and the Lannisters, in general, are more villainous than Olenna and the Tyrells in general, Cersei in a way serves Olenna an appropriate response for her actions - with bonus Irony points for not even knowing it.
Her death also has an ironic flavor: she dies with poison (albeit a painless one, unlike the Strangler which was used to kill Joffrey) handed by his own father Jaime. The difference is that he had no idea she was the one to have killed him, which she tells him just before dying.
Last of Their Kind: After the destruction of the Great Sept of Baelor, Olenna became the last surviving member of House Tyrell, and even then only in name as she is a Redwyne by birth. After her death by poison in Season 7, House Tyrell is officially dead, with Wardenship of the South and Lord Paramountship of the Reach set to fall to Randyll Tarly - though the end of Season 8 reveals that it falls to Bronn, of all people.
Like an Old Married Couple: Briefly has this dynamic with Tywin Lannister, of all people, during "The Lion and the Rose".
Mama Bear:
She killed Joffrey because he would have treated Margaery badly. To a lesser extent, she was also shielding Loras from future harm, as it was only a matter of time before Joffrey would enact a law that would make homosexuality a capital crime. In Season 5, despite her advanced age, she's descended to the capital, getting into fights to protect her grandchildren. It's actually quite touching.
She refuses to leave Margaery and Loras behind, even as the High Sparrow seeks to "convert" her like he did with Margaery. It's only when Margaery reveals to her that she's still playing the game that Olenna decides to return to the Reach.
After Cersei kills Mace, Margaery, and Loras in the Wildfire explosion, Olenna decides to ally herself with House Martell and, presumably, Queen Daenerys as well in order to get revenge on Cersei.
The Mentor: To her granddaughter Margaery.
Mercy Kill: Her death, compared to what Cersei originally had in store for her (such as public whipping and torture), is provided by Jaime Lannister, who gives her a mere painless poison she takes without hesitation. She proceeds to spit on his mercy by revealing she was the one to have killed his son's Joffrey, making him regret having given her mercy in the first place.
My Beloved Smother: Sees nothing wrong with running her son's life; subverted in that she actually is more competent than him.
My Greatest Failure: Underestimating Cersei and being unable to imagine, let alone anticipate, the horrible things Cersei would be capable of.
Never Bareheaded: She’s always seen wearing some sort of head covering.
Never Got to Say Goodbye: Lord Mace, Margaery, and Loras died when she was home at the Reach.
Never Mess with Granny: Throughout Seasons 3 and 4, she proves herself to be a tough and uncompromising old lady... but her most jaw-droppingly awesome moment came in "Oathkeeper" where she reveals she had poisoned Joffrey in order to protect her granddaughter from his sadistic excesses. She is also ready to have an all out war against the Sparrows to prevent Margaery to make a walk of penance. After Cersei blows up the Great Sept of Baelor, killing Mace, Margaery, and Loras, she doesn't need much convincing to join the Targaryen-Martell-Greyjoy alliance against Cersei, sending the entirety of the Tyrell fleet to Meereen to join Dany's invasion armada.
Olenna: [to Margaery] You didn't think I'd let you marry that beast, did you?
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!:
In her understandable concern for Margaery's well-being, she has Joffrey killed, which triggers the demise of the rational Lannister leadership (Tywin and Tyrion) and the empowerment of Cersei. This brings major disaster.
One could argue that she had a hand in Tyrion's poor choice to have the Unsullied invade Casterly Rock as an opening gambit to Danerys' war with Cersei. See Teeth-Clenched Teamwork below.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed: It's probably not a coincidence that Olenna's fashion sense, behavior, and mastery of Realpolitik harkens a lot to portrayals of Eleanor of Aquitaine, the matriarch of The House of Plantagenet (all during her husband King Henry II's rule, and even as regent to her kingly sons, Richard I and John). Olenna's outfit even echoes Eleanor's tomb effigy◊ quite a bit.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Surrounds herself with simpering girls (or "hens" as she calls them) to seem harmless, when she's really a dangerous chessmaster on the level of Tyrion, Tywin, Varys, or Petyr Baelish, a fact which all of them are fully aware of and respect accordingly. Indeed, she and Littlefinger team up to take out Joffrey with Tyrion taking the blame; not only does nobody suspect them, no one even knows of their secret alliance.
Out-Gambitted: After the plot to marry Loras to Sansa is discovered, she's able to put up some resistance against a new arrangement with the Lannisters. Lord Tywin trumps her with Royal prerogatives, anyway; if she doesn't cave in, Loras will be made a member of the celibate Kingsguard, meaning the Tyrell name will wither and fade, as Joffrey's sons would inherit Highgarden instead. Being the resourceful lady that she is, the setback never comes in play because her plot to murder Joffrey disrupts the Lannisters and eventually takes Tywin down.
Outliving One's Offspring: Loses her son and grandchildren to Cersei's wildfire scheme in the Season 6 finale.
Pet the Dog:
She is one of the very few individuals in Westeros who compliments Brienne instead of insulting her when meeting the female warrior for the first time. The only other two characters who have previously done this are Renly and Catelyn.
She literally does this in "The Lion and the Rose" when she caresses Sansa's face as she offers her condolences for Robb's death. Olenna then tells the girl that she has an open invitation to Highgarden, which makes Sansa smile. The fact that she chooses this precise moment to unload the crystal with poison from Sansa's necklace spoils it somewhat.
In a deleted scene between her and Mace, she initially belittles her son for never thinking that his mission to Braavos was a way for Cersei to remove him from court. But when Mace affirms his desire to save his children, Olenna's demeanour quickly softens and reassures him that they will.
Politically Incorrect Hero: Unlike the other heroic characters her views of commoners are fitting of the nobility of the time. Treating them more like mouths to feed and entertain to stop riots. The High Sparrow calls her out on it when she threatens to cut King's Landing food supply, pointing out she'll just rise them against the noble who bullies them for her whim than the man who preaches equality.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Delivers a great one to Cersei in "The Broken Man", calling out the Lannister queen's stupidity that endangered two great houses... resulting in Cersei admitting her mistakes, possibly the first time in the series.
Cersei: Your grandson is still a prisoner. You'll leave him rotting in a cell?
Olenna: (scowling at Cersei) Loras rots in a cell because of you. The High Sparrow rules this city because of you. Our two ancient houses face collapse because of you and your stupidity!
Red Baron: "The Queen of Thorns".
Refuge in Audacity:
Defends Loras's homosexuality to Tywin, questioning if he himself has never been guilty of the occasional spot of buggery, perhaps with some of his male cousins! She also brings up the issue of Joffrey's true parentage, and instead of a Death Glare that would have been the response for anyone else, she receives from Tywin a hasty bit of Plausible Deniability.
When Tywin threatens her with naming Loras to the Kingsguard, thus leaving House Tyrell without an heir and Joffrey's potential children with a superior claim to Highgarden via Margaery, Lady Olenna takes Tywin's quill and breaks it.
A retroactive example is her loudly declaring, "What kind of monster would murder a man at his own wedding day?" in earshot of the Lannisters when referencing the events of the Red Wedding. This happens not long before she poisons Joffrey's wine, causing him to die horribly at his own wedding.
An even bigger one is her conversation with Cersei at the Sept of Baelor in "And Now His Watch Is Ended":
Olenna: We mothers do what we can to keep our sons from the grave, but they do seem to yearn for it.
Revenge: Her only remaining motivation is to get revenge on Cersei for taking her son, grandson, and granddaughter away from her.
Right Hand Versus Left Hand: She is the de facto ruler of the Tyrell family, but strategic alliances are the one thing out of her control. She is most critical of Mace's marriage policy for Margaery, so she moves to King's Landing to do damage control, keeping the not very bright Mace in the dark.
Screw Politeness, I'm a Senior!: How she got her In-Series Nickname, the Queen of Thorns. She always says exactly what she thinks. Or at least projects this image. A reputation for Brutal Honesty makes it all the more easy to get away with lying.
Self-Deprecation: She thinks the golden rose and words of House Tyrell ("Growing Strong") are absolutely stupid and hates the family's penchant for Sigil Spamming the rose everywhere they go.
Sensing You Are Outmatched: She starts out with the assumption that the High Sparrow is as susceptible to bribery as anyone else. However, being a better judge of character than Cersei, she quickly realises that her usual tactics won't work this time.
Sex Goddess: Olenna is stated to be (possibly violent) one during her youth to the point of making her husband unable to walk for days.
Sibling Triangle: Her late husband was originally engaged to her sister until Lady Olenna seduced him.
Speak Ill of the Dead: She likes to point out how dumb her late husband was.
Surrounded by Idiots: Lady Olenna's not too shy about expressing how stupid she felt her son (Mace) and grandson (Loras) were when they threw in their lot with Renly. She doesn't speak much better of her late husband either, who it seems died in a rather unceremonious fashion whilst out hawking.
Olenna: My husband, the late Lord Luthor, managed to ride off a cliff while hawking. They say he was looking at the sky and paying no mind to where his horse was taking him. Now my son is doing the same, only this time he's riding a lion instead of a horse.
Mirth to Power: Her acidic quips and one-liners tend to point out the hypocrisy and fallacious thinking to whoever she's speaking to. She gets away with saying things that others would be beheaded for.
Sympathetic Murderer: She poisons King Joffrey so her granddaughter won't be married to a sadistic monster. He really is that, so the murder isn't hard to sympathize with.
Taking You with Me: Olenna notes that she has a strong defense against Littlefinger (stronger than any other character's) openly or secretly moving against her: if she finds House Tyrell falling, she can simply reveal how they plotted with Littlefinger to kill Joffrey. Littlefinger looks furious when she makes this claim.
Olenna: I promise you, Lord Baelish, that our fates are joined. Together, we murdered a King. If my House should fall, I will have nothing to hide. And if I should meet with some "accident" here at your broken little flesh-market, they'll never even find what's left of you.
Teeth-Clenched Teamwork: In Season 7, despite being on the same side as Tyrion as they are both allied with Daenerys, she shows him no respect at all. She tells Daenerys to ignore his advice, and outright neglects to inform him of what's been going on in Westeros during his absence, including how House Lannister is now bankrupt, which leads to Tyrion's strategy for Daenerys' army to conquer Westeros falling apart because it was based off of outdated intel - which could've been easily corrected if Olenna had been more open with her allies.
Too Much Information: Proudly tells her granddaughter the story of how she seduced her late husband, including how they had sex.
Underestimating Badassery: Before leaving King's Landing, Olenna thought for sure that Cersei was finished, pointing out that she was surrounded by thousands of enemies and mockingly asked if she was going to kill them all. While it weren't all of her enemies, Cersei did indeed kill a large number of them in the season finale, including Olenna's son and her two grandchildren. In her final moments, she admits to Jaime that Cersei did things that not even Olenna would imagine doing herself.
Unusual Euphemism: Refers to Loras as a "sword swallower" when Tywin asks about her grandson's proclivities.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: Although done to protect Margaery and to weaken House Lannister even more, assassinating Joffrey in hindsight was a very bad idea since it sets off a chain of dominos that lead to the death of Tywin Lannister, the main stabilizing force in Westeros and a power vacuum which the High Sparrow steps into, weakening the power and influences of the Great Houses. And then Ceresi kills the High Sparrow along with most of the Tyrells, claiming the Iron Throne.
The Woman Behind the Man: She's the true head of House Tyrell. She casually dismisses Mace when she's talking to Tywin.
Women Are Wiser:
If someone asks Olenna, the men of Tyrell family tend to be popular but rather dense — perfect for effective figureheads if the women are smart and assertive enough. She might have a point. Olenna sees directly through Tywin's bold boasts, including his 'apparent' lack of worry about the Iron Bank, to which she reminds him that he isn't that stupid. Ironically, however, her decisions to do damage control, help accelerate the decline of her house more than her son's and grandson's.
In what would be her last words of advice to Daenarys, Olenna told the Queen that the way she had gotten to be around as long as she had was by ignoring all the 'clever men' that advised her what to do. Given the context, it was primarily a warning against putting too much stock in Tyrion's advice, but the broader message was that Dany should trust herself more than any man.
Worthy Opponent:
Praises Tywin Lannister on living up to his reputation. While she admits to Cersei after Tywin's death that she doesn't like Tywin on a personal level, she at the very least respects him. Tywin himself seemed to consider her this, treating Olenna as his intellectual equal, and recognizing her as the true head of House Tyrell, dealing with her directly when arranging a marriage between their two families, and not with her son Mace, who is technically the Lord of Highgarden.
Subverted when she meets Tyrion to plan the funding of the Royal Wedding. She was expecting more from him in terms of his intelligence and licentiousness. She lampshades the fact that he now behaves like a proper gentleman (which disappoints her) and is an easily bullied accountant, rather than the lustful and clever schemer that he used to be.note 
Would Hurt a Child: The revelation that she is Joffrey's murderer shows she is just as ruthless when it comes to sentiment as Tywin, Littlefinger, and others. Of course, Joffrey is an Asshole Victim and she was protecting Margaery from a horrible fate and Olenna admits she did not expect the poison to kill him in such a gruesome manner, but she still killed a child who died in his mother's arms.