Abusive Parents: Her parents are a touchy subject for her, but she discloses to Varys that she "stopped being a child" when she was nine, because her mother made sure of that. One can infer that this is the reason she left Lorath, given the implication that she is not the sort of lowborn girl who might become a camp follower for lack of other options.
Asshole Victim: After betraying Tyrion at the trial, she is later found in Tywin's bed and tries to kill Tyrion when he discovers her. He strangles her to death in response.
Berserk Button: Does not like people talking about her parentage; she's touchy about her past in general, and her pleased smile when Cersei confidently identifies her as Lorathi vanishes when Cersei equally confidently identifies her as lowborn.
Break Her Heart to Save Her: When Shae's life is endangered after Cersei and Tywin find out about her relationship with Tyrion, Tyrion lies to her, says he never loved her, and delivers an absolutely brutal diatribe against her in order to get Shae to leave him and sail for Pentos. This backfires horrendously as it convinces her to testify against him at his regicide trial.
Camp Follower: To Tyrion.
Chastity Dagger: Carries one in her garter. She might not be chaste, but she's not going to be raped, either.
Clingy Jealous Girl: Has definitely become this as of Season 3, interrogating Tyrion brutally about his interest in and history with other women (Sansa and Ros, respectively). This is despite the fact that Tyrion has shown nothing but despair over his marriage to Sansa, viewing her more as someone he must protect, and now that Ros is dead.
Cluster F-Bomb: The way she overuses the F word may suggest that she's not familiar with more appropriate Common (English) words for "Have Sex". Then again, she's a whore...
The Confidant: To Sansa, after being made her handmaiden. To the point where HBO's website once listed her as part of the Stark household as opposed to the Lannisters. Particularly noticeable in "The Climb", where Shae is aware of Sansa's engagement to Ser Loras Tyrell, and apparently did not even tell Tyrion about it.
Composite Character: Even though Tysha also exists in the show (also as a character who is mentioned in Tyrion's backstory), her function is mostly outsourced to Shae, which makes the latter a much more sympathetic character. Like Tysha, show!Shae actually was made a prostitute against her will, she genuinely loved Tyrion, and her fate is ultimately the reason why Tyrion kills Tywin.
Damned by Faint Praise: Shae explains in "What Is Dead May Never Die" how every time she cooks for a man, they tell her how good of a whore she is.
Death by Irony: Tywin threatens her by proxy with hanging if he catches her in bed with Tyrion. Tyrion catches her in bed with Tywin and strangles her to death for it.
Did You Think I Can't Feel?: She gets really pissed when, after all they have been through, Tyrion assumes she's still only with him for the money.
Tyrion: I'm a monster, as well as a dwarf! You should charge me double.
Shae: You think I'm here for money?
Tyrion: That was the arrangement we made. I pay you and you lie to me.
Shae: Oh, I'm a poor little rich man and nobody loves me, so I make jokes all the time and pay them to laugh. Fuck your money.
Disproportionate Retribution: While Tyrion calling her a whore and saying he never loved her was brutal, not only was it only a ploy to Break Her Heart to Save Her, but he also set her up to live a life of comfort in Pentos. Her response? Provide false testimony that Tyrion and Sansa conspired to murder Joffrey while humiliating Tyrion by reciting twisted renditions of their most intimate moments. She does all of this despite knowing full well that her testimony would get both Tyrion and Sansa sentenced to death. When Tyrion finds her in Tywin's bed, she does not hesitate to pull a knife and try to kill him.
Et Tu, Brute?: After Tyrion tries to Shoo the Dog and get her to safety, she returns as Cersei's star witness at Tyrion's trial, in which she not only lies about Tyrion and Sansa murdering Joffrey, but twists the knife further by citing their most heartwarming moments together and twisting them to humiliate Tyrion in the most gutwrenching possible way. This is the testimony which utterly breaks Tyrion and launches him far past the Despair Event Horizon, causing the poor man to just fucking lose it and explode with several decades worth of bitterness and rage at his ungrateful family and the ungrateful nobles of King's Landing.
Green-Eyed Monster: Despite being genuinely protective of Sansa, she is still jealous of her being Tyrion's wife. This paranoia never really leaves, even when it becomes clear Tyrion did not consummate their marriage. Sansa is young, pretty, and (as far as King's Landing knows) heir to Winterfell. She's everything a low-born prostitute fears she cannot compete with in the long run.
Hooker with a Heart of Gold: In sharp contrast to the novels, where she's Only in It for the Money and has no particular loyalty or feelings to anyone. By the second season, she has very little in common with her pagebound counterpart.
Ultimately completely subverted in "The Children", in which she's found in Tywin's bed, calling him "My Lion", the same nickname she gave Tyrion. She then tries to kill him. Her stupidity and pettiness despite Tyrion trying to save her got the best of her.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Her final act is to have Tyrion sentenced to death... Via publically humiliating him, with mostly unnecessary lies. When Tyrion strangles her, it's not exactly a heartbreaking death.
Kill the Ones You Love: Is strangled to death by Tyrion in self-defense, even though Tyrion admits to his father that he still loved her.
Lethal Chef: Lampshades this when Tyrion tells her that he can hide her by giving her a job in the kitchens.
Shae: Every man who's ever tasted my cooking has told me what a good whore I am.
Mysterious Past: What is her background? Why did she leave Lorath when she was 13? Why (and how) did her mother "make sure" that she became "a woman" at 9? Is her mood noticeably shifting for the worse whenever somebody refers to her as lowborn because they are correct and she is resentful over that fact, or because she is actually highborn and hates that she is mistaken for a lowborn?
Mysterious Woman: Even the very astute Tyrion incorrectly guesses at her past.
Ninja Maid: She chases down and threatens another handmaiden at knife-point to protect Sansa.
Only One Name: She's just Shae. Varys once contrasts himself and Shae with the highborn who have last names.
Varys: You have one name. As do I. Here, only the family name matters.
Promotion to Opening Titles: After Season 1.
Protectorate: Over Sansa.
Riches to Rags: Possibly. Her Berserk Button about being called lowborn, reluctance to be a handmaid or perform menial tasks (and apparent ignorance of how to do them at all), and eagerness to be at court in King's Landing despite the danger (and adjusting to it quite quickly) could imply that she is from a privileged background. The hints at her having Abusive Parents might explain why she would flee that life and the entire continent of Essos, not simply her homeland of Lorath.
Secret Relationship: Her relationship with Tyrion, and for vital reasons. Tywin warns Tyrion not to take her to court and has vowed to hang the next whore he finds in Tyrion's bed.
Selective Obliviousness: Her jealousy regarding Tyrion's marriage to Sansa despite Tyrion clearly acting as a protector and not consummating their marriage. The fact she feels Varys and Tyrion are exaggerating how precarious her position is, when any passing knowledge of Tywin and Cersei would inform most this is not the case, is very noticeable. Eventually, this refusal to accept how much danger she's in actually forces Tyrion to make a deliberately horrible speech to drive her away and she seemingly takes it at face value.
Shoo the Dog: What Tyrion ends up doing after finding out Cersei and Tywin know about her.
Stripperific: Well, she's a prostitute. It comes with the territory.
Toxic Friend Influence: Varys tries to buy her off because he believes that she's a dangerous liability to Tyrion, one of the few men who could make the country a better place.
The Un-Reveal: It's hinted early on that she's got a complicated (and probably tragic) past. In "Blackwater" it seems like she's finally going to reveal it, but she gets interrupted. She sticks around for two more seasons after that, but we never do get to find out what her story was.
What the Hell Is That Accent?: An in-universe example — Shae's accent is clearly out of place in English-accented Westeros. Lampshaded when Tyrion asks and she simply responds, "Foreign." In "Blackwater", Cersei pegs her accent as Lorathi. This seems to be a combination of a joke/fantasy Accent Adaptation, in that Jaqen is also supposed to be from Lorath, and is played by fellow German Tom Wlaschiha.
Woman Scorned: One possible explanation for Shae's betrayal of Tyrion. Unlike her book counterpart, show Shae really seems to care for Tyrion so it's harder to believe she'd just turn on him for money. She took his break up very hard so it's not too much of a stretch to think she's trying to get back at him. Well, that, and Tywin/Cersei probably threatened her...
Yandere: Another possible explanation for her betrayal of Tyrion. She may well have been of the "if I can't have you" variety at the end as Sansa's life was also threatened by her testimony.