Abusive Parents: Though he never was outwardly malicious to Donna and in fact loves her deeply, his tendency to experiment with drugs and throw nudist parties at their house often frustrated Donna, much to Bob's ignorance or apathy towards how it made his daughter feel. Not to mention he decided to date Jackie's mother, despite how unpleasant it was for his daughter and Jackie who were close friends.
Berserk Button: Bob is usually a Nice Guy, but he becomes extremely angry and upset at matters that involve Eric and Donna being intimate.
Beware the Silly Ones: Despite his bumbling and odd antics, he has even shown Red that he can be pretty intimidating, notably after he finds out that Donna has been taking birth control pills.
Big Fun: He's a chubby guy who's always cracking jokes or being jolly.
Boyfriend-Blocking Dad: Can be like this at times with Donna as it relates to Eric. He actually thought their relationship was adorable at the start of the show, but reacted very badly when they started having sex.
Bumbling Dad: Bob tries his best, but is simply unsuited for the role of fatherhood, possibly as a result of having Donna so early in life.
Butt-Monkey: Oh, Bob. First, he ends up going out of business due to Price Mart coming in. Then his wife leaves him and his daughter to go to California which puts him in a deep depression. And then another girlfriend he really got along well with leaves him so upset that he wouldn't even leave his bed.
Catchphrase:
His usual greeting: "Hey, there! Hi, there! Ho, there!"
When something goes bad: "Aw/oh, geez..."
Cloudcuckoolander: Bob has a strange obsession with the banjo. He once advised Eric to deal with a rival for Donna's affections by hitting him with a banjo, and also advised Red to get Kitty a banjo to cheer her up when she was upset about her menopause.
Red:...A banjo, Bob?
Bob: I can't hold a banjo and not smile.
Red: You can't hold a potato chip and not smile.
The Dog Bites Back: When it came to dating Pam, Donna and Jackie were very much against this. Bob, however, finally stands up for himself and says that he doesn't need his daughter telling him how he should be happy. Also in the final episodes, Bob has had enough of Red's insults and curses him out. Though, he quickly apologizes for it.
Doting Grandparent: Bob loves Leia to the point he and Red fight over who give the better gift to her on her birthday and becomes disappointed that Leia prefers Grandpa Red over him.
Extreme Doormat: Especially after his wife leaves. Even to his own daughter.
Girly Run: We don't see it, but according to Red he runs like a girl.
Hidden Depths: During Career Day, Donna is embarrassed by the way Bob behaves at work and all the goofy promotions. He justifies the craziness, however, by saying it's all to pay for Donna's college and ensure a good future. (Except the presence of a monkey, which was for his own amusement.)
Honest John's Dealership: It is eventually driven out of business by Price Mart, leaving Bob destitute until he invents a car accessory that brings him plenty of patent royalties.
Jerkass to One: As the show goes on, he becomes increasingly hostile to Eric and constantly badmouths him to the Formans whenever he gets into trouble, due to being a Boyfriend-Blocking Dad to Donna. It gets worse after Eric leaves Donna at the altar on their wedding day.
Kavorka Man: Though visibly muscular, Bob has a real bulldog face, a hilariously ridiculous white guy afro, and insists on rather clashing clothing, even for the 70s. He still manages to hook up with hotties like Midge and Pam.
Minnesota Nice: Has the thickest midwestern accent of the main cast, and is the most consistently nice adult on the show.
Nice Guy: Wouldn't he have to be to hang out with Red all the time? Kelso also reasoned that this trope was how Bob hooks up with attractive women. As old-fashioned as Bob can be, he has put his family ahead of himself so many times that a lot of the bad things that happen to him feel almost undeserved.
OOC Is Serious Business: On rare occasions, he will put his foot down and assert his authority. Sending Donna to Catholic school for running away and rebuking attempts to break up him and Pam are two such examples.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: He's a chubby and unattractive guy, but ends up marrying and dating gorgeous women like Midge and Pam. This gets Discussed in one episode, where Hyde assumes he just has a huge penis much to Donna's horror.