All Girls Want Bad Boys: She spends much of the show hooked up with Eric, but otherwise is very attracted to bad boys like Hyde or Aerosmith's Steven Tyler. Eric will often attempt to be more rebellious to impress her, and she's visibly more into him when he shows his wild side. This is what made her briefly hook up with the roguish-but-selfish Casey Kelso.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: A lot, though not quite as much in later seasons. This trait is completely averted in the sequel series.
Bratty Teenage Daughter: To Bob, both out of rebellion and when he's doing something she doesn't want or like. The only reason she's not called out on it is because Bob's an Extreme Doormat. He does, however, snap back at her when she tries to get him to stop dating Jackie's mom.
But I Would Really Enjoy It: She loves Eric, but both of them have doubts about consummating their relationship until mid-Season 2.
Buxom Beauty Standard: She has a well-endowed figure, which is often pointed out by the boys, especially Fez and Eric. Humorously, Jackie frequently treats it like it's a defect, due to her own Petite Pride.
Catholic School Girls Rule: In Season 5, Bob sent her to Catholic school as punishment for running away to California. Eric, and all the other guys for that matter, doesn't mind the uniform at all.
Childhood Friend Romance: With Eric, as they befriended each other as children, dated as teens, and continue with a Will They or Won't They? to their adulthood.
Closer to Earth: Tends to be the voice of reason in the group, though she occasionally shares this role with either Eric or Hyde.
Deadpan Snarker: She's often making deadpan sarcastic remarks, especially around Jackie, who rarely gets them.
Does Not Know Her Own Strength: In "The Seeker", Donna accidentally knocks Hyde off the water tower with what is supposed to be a light, friendly tap.
Donna: How am I stronger than all the guys I hang out with?
Drugs Are Bad: Her smoking ends up getting Eric suspended. She asked him to hold her cigarette, and a teacher caught him with it.
Dude Magnet: A vast majority of male characters from Hyde, Kelso, Kelso's brother Casey, Fez to many one-time minor characters had an interest in Donna (although Kelso and Fez are into anything that moves). Emphasized later when she works in the radio station's booth as "Hot Donna". She's initially embarrassed at being a Lust Object for guys to leer at ("Hot Donna has now signed 87 guys! And two girls") but then she starts enjoying it.
Everyone Loves Blondes: Dyeing her hair blonde caused quite a stir in Point Place. Granted, she was considered attractive when she was a redhead. (Laura Prepon dyed her hair for a different role.)
Fiery Redhead: A redhead with an aggressive and passionate personality, until she dyed it blonde in Season 7.
Genius Bruiser: She is the most muscular and the strongest in the group, and one of the smarter ones.
Girl Next Door: To Eric.
Hollywood Genetics: Donna is a natural redhead, however her mom is a blonde and her dad has dark brown hair.
Horrible Judge of Character: A recurrent feature of hers when it comes to guys who are interested in her, and is unaware of their true intentions:
With Casey Kelso, whom she briefly dated in Season 4. She forgives him for skimping out on an early date they had, failing to see the early red flag this presented, got drunk with him, and assumed that he was in love with her, only for him to break up with her when the burden of dating her proved too much when the extent of Red, Bob, and Eric's disapproval of him became apparent.
When Mitch asks her to accompany him to a wedding, she thinks its just to preserve his own dignity by having someone accompany him to the wedding, only to be proven wrong when he blindsides her with a marriage declaration. Eric, having foreseen how shady Mitch is, does not hold back on rubbing this in Donna's face, to her amused annoyance.
Hypocrite:
In one episode she gets angry with Eric for making plans with his friends without checking with her first. At the end of the episode she makes him promise that he'll always check with her before making time with his friends. Eric then asks Donna if she needs his permission to hang out with her friends, to which she replies "no" and leaves to go see a friend.
And in another episode she yells at Eric for going on two dates with another girl while she and Eric were broken up. Donna, meanwhile, had slept with Casey Kelso around the same time.
Also calls Eric out for his insecurity and not trusting her in "Radio Daze" after she announced to the whole town (including the DJ who was clearly attracted her based on calling her "Hot Donna") that she was single and never bothered to talk to him about it. While this wasn't the first time Eric had been jealous, she behaved the same way to him in "Eric's Panties".
Informed Attractiveness: While not ugly by any means, she's repeatedly stated to be one of the most attractive girls in town. Except by Jackie, who states that she looks like a trucker. Though this is Jackie we're talking about.
In Vino Veritas: When drunk or in "the circle" she has a tendency to act the loopiest of any of the gang, to downright Cloud Cuckoolander levels.
Jerkass: From time to time. She can be really petty, abrasive and arrogant.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: What she really is.
The Lad-ette: A trait that Jackie bemoans all the time.
Male Gaze: In the episode “The Best Christmas Ever,” Donna is on a ladder, bending over to put decorations on the Christmas tree. She asks “Okay, how does that look?” in reference to the tree. But Eric and Hyde look over and look at her butt for a moment. In the episode “Moon Over Point Place,” in the circle, the camera focuses on her shaking her ass. In the credits of the episode, the same thing occurs, though it involves the whole cast this time.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: Masculine girl to Eric's feminine boy. also with Randy, who is quite vain.
Maybe Ever After: The show ends with Eric returning to Point Place with his relationship with Donna unclear, but the sequel series showed they did get married and had a daughter.
Ms. Fanservice: Donna is very attractive, and everyone knows it, and on the radio, she is known as "Hot Donna" for obvious reasons. She also shook her ass at the camera.
Old Shame: In That '90s Show she clearly isn't proud of having dated Casey Kelso. Unless it is a goof and not an intentional omission, it also extends to Season 8 of That '70s Show where she states twice that she only ever dated Eric.
One of the Boys: She's just as likely to get down and dirty as the rest of the guys in the group, if not more.
Only Sane Woman: Just like Eric, to the point where Kelso jokingly refers to them as "Mom and Dad".
Real Women Don't Wear Dresses: She hates the notion that being feminine automatically means being "girly", and so she typically wears jeans and long-sleeved or plaid shirts. Jackie often calls this her lumberjack look. Despite this, she's worn long dresses on special occasions and had to wear a skirt as part of her school uniform.
Shaking the Rump: In “Moon Over Point Place,” she shakes her butt at the camera.
She Cleans Up Nicely: In her prom dress, she gets the attention of many male background characters. Also, when she wears the catholic schoolgirl outfit in "I Can't Quit You, Baby", she gets this reaction from the other characters.
Shoe Size Angst: Has big feet which she is sometimes teased about, usually by Jackie.
The Smart Girl: Between her and Valley Girl Jackie, she definitively has the brains of the group's girls.
Statuesque Stunner: She's a Dude Magnet and quite tallnote , especially compared to Jackie and to the point of Tiny Guy, Huge Girl proportions with Eric.
Straw Feminist: Verges on this at several points, mostly Depending on the Writer. Sometime's it's portrayed realistically, sometime's it's Played for Laughs.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: The strong girl to Hyde's Smart Guy.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The Tomboy (The Lad-ette, Fiery Redhead, and One of the Boys) to Jackie's Girly Girl (Proud Beauty and Lovable Alpha Bitch).
Tomboyish Voice: She's a tomboy played by deep-voiced Laura Prepon.
Took a Level in Kindness: Donna is noticeably far less bitchy in the second half of the series. This continues into the sequel series, where she’s portrayed as a warm and reasonable mother to her and Eric's daughter Leia.
The Ugly Guy's Hot Daughter: She definitely takes more after her mother.
Unkempt Beauty: In universe, gets the most compliments from the guys when she isn't dolled up.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Jackie, much to Donna's dismay.
What Does She See in Him?: Many people (including Eric himself on occasion) don't understand what the heck Donna is doing with Eric.
Eric: Donna? I just have to ask... why me? I mean there are so many other guys who are way better looking.
Donna: You know you're right, if only I could be with some handsome jock who was mean and shallow and didn't make me laugh.