All Girls Want Bad Boys: Her relationship with Hyde.
The Beautiful Elite: She's pretty, she's rich, and she won't shut up about it.
"If I'm not a rich, popular girl, I'm nothing. I'm like Donna."
Beauty Is Bad: Downplayed. She's pretty and popular as well as snobby, rude, and self-absorbed, but deep down not a bad person.
Berserk Button: Don't tell anyone her middle name is Beulah.
Beware the Silly Ones: A girlish cheerleader who's normally even more useless in a fight than Eric. When Laurie insulted Jackie though, Jackie finally snapped and attacked Laurie in a vicious Cat Fight. Even Hyde was impressed, telling Jackie that “you kicked her ass, man!” Jackie also beats up her karate instructor in her first lesson after Donna makes a point about her (Jackie's) breakup with Hyde.
Big Eater: When down on her luck or unable to find a boyfriend, she tends to eat. A lot.
Brainless Beauty: Downplayed. She's shallow, vapid, ditzy and sometimes comes across as an airhead, but she's not as stupid as Kelso.
Brutal Honesty: She is pretty tactless and speaks her mind without a filter.
Hyde: Roy has some problems with people.
Roy: They don't like me. You don't like me, right?
Jackie: Not really. But to be fair, I have very high standards.
Roy: Yeah? She's really nice, Steven.
Character Development: When she started dating Hyde. She could very well be the most developed character in the entire show. Many of the characters remain rather static throughout the series but Jackie goes from being a vapid, money-obsessed cheerleader stifling her true self for the sake of popularity to a competent, though still headstrong woman who isn't afraid to take care of herself and doesn't hide who she is.
Control Freak: Often bossing Kelso around and telling him what to do. In That 90s Show, she's still controlling towards him.
Cute, but Cacophonic: She once describes herself as "a beautiful girl with a shrill, demanding voice".
Dating What Daddy Hates: Her father doesn't like Kelso, even going as far as cutting off Jackie's financial support when he discovers she's still dating him.
The Ditz: Along with Kelso in a Ditz couple, although she's definitely smarter than him.
Don't You Dare Pity Me!: In Season 5, Jackie displays this attitude after learning her father is in jail and her mother has abandoned her.
Dude Magnet: Just ask Kelso, Hyde, Fez, and other guys who are attracted to her throughout the show.
Embarrassing Middle Name: Her middle name is Beulah; for some reason, she considers it horribly embarrassing and wants to keep it in secret. In the Halloween episode where they find out, she actually beats Hyde up for saying it...though it could be just an Imagine Spot.
The Fashionista: Down to the shopping addiction and the affection for makeovers.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Jackie starts out as this, with everyone including her primarily because she's Kelso's girlfriend (while urging him to dump her). Eventually, she and Donna become best friends to Donna's surprise. The guys all start accepting her for different reasons—Hyde alternately starts burning her and protecting her, Fez develops a major crush on her, and Eric takes a liking to her after she beats up Laurie (although Eric would still mostly keep her at arm's length for the rest of the show).
Girls Love Stuffed Animals: Has a collection of stuffed animals. Her favorite is a unicorn that she calls "Fluffycakes".
Girly Girl with a Tomboy Streak: Normally very feminine (especially in contrast to Donna), a cheerleader and high-maintenance rich girl, but in one episode she helps Red fix a car, after Eric proves inadequate.
Informed Attractiveness: It's Played for Laughs once since Mila Kunis was and is quite a looker; when Eric asks Hyde why he'd hook up with Jackie. Hyde tells Eric to imagine being stranded on an island with Jackie in nothing but a coconut-bikini, he still doesn't get it. Then he tells Eric to do what he does and tune her out. So Eric re-imagines the same thing but without sound, only to realize Jackie is kind of hot.
Informed Deformity:
Ironically, considering her Informed Attractiveness mentioned above, Jackie is said to not look that good without makeup. Of course, when the viewer sees her in situations where she wouldn't have makeup on, she is just Mila Kunis without makeup (except the time in "Hyde Moves In" when Kelso exaggerated her perceived ugliness in his mind), so running away screaming like Kelso in Season 1 or comparing her face to scrambled eggs like Fez in Season 8 feels excessive.
In Season 8 a go-to insult for Jackie became, of all things, "midget". While she is the shortest of the teens, she is still of average height and it is baffling when she is called this by Fez (who is only slightly taller than her) or, on one occasion, Kitty (who is even shorter).
I Reject Your Reality: For the first couple of seasons, she has a major blindspot about Kelso, convinced that he's her ideal boyfriend underneath it all, and getting mad at anyone who tries to tell her that he really is a crass, selfish idiot who isn't going to change any time soon. Only when she actually catches him cheating on her with Laurie does the truth finally dawn.
Jackie: Donna, how dare you say that about me and Michael?
Donna: Jackie, you wanted my honest opinion!
Jackie: Your honest opinion that we're great together!
Irony: The main reason that Hyde and Jackie break up is because Hyde refuses to even consider committing to a permanent relationship. While early Jackie couldn't give less of a rat's ass about the future, it was Hyde's challenging of Jackie's personality that causes her to grow up and begin to seriously think about her future. When Hyde declines to even give Jackie a simple maybe as to the future of their relationship they break up. If it wasn't for Hyde's influence Jackie would probably remain the same airhead of the early seasons, and wouldn't have cared about the permanence of their relationship.
It's All About Me: Especially in early seasons, she only cares about herself.
Jerkass: The reigning bitch of Point Place.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Thanks to Character Development, she becomes sweeter and less bitchy in later seasons.
Kick the Dog: When Fez politely rejects her, she becomes a full blown crazy psychopath who tries to hurt Fez badly just to get sadistic satisfaction. This is what later causes Fez to get fed up with her.
Lesser of Two Evils: In Season 2, most of the group barely tolerates Jackie (at best), but they'll still take her over Laurie.
Lethal Chef: She rarely tries to cook, but when she does, the results are disastrous.
Lovable Alpha Bitch: Donna eventually warms up to her, and they become a Tomboy and Girly Girl pair.
Lovable Sex Maniac: Subverted. With Kelso, initially, the two of them did everything but engage in intercourse, but Kelso being arrested (cementing him as a sexy bad boy in her eyes) was enough to push her over the edge, and after that you couldn't leave the two of them alone in a room with a flat surface. After their breakup and her subsequent near-obsession with Hyde, she started out this way with him.
Male Gaze: Jackie was subject to this long before she became a full-fledged Ms. Fanservice.
In a famous scene in early season 5, Hyde shares a male gaze moment of Jackie with Eric to explain what he sees in her.
Jackie invokes this, as well as some fetish to attract Hyde's attention by wearing a toe ring. Hyde bravely retains his cool.
Morality Pet: To Hyde, as when they start dating he becomes more soft and less pissed-off.
Motor Mouth: To the frustration of virtually everyone else, she'll just go on and on and on.
Ms. Fanservice: After Mila Kunis turned 18, she had many Bare Your Midriff moments. Beforehand, she doesn't get many due to Kunis being underage.
Narcissist: In her own words, "if I could run across the beach into my own arms, I would."
No Accounting for Taste: Her relationship with Hyde. She's a rich, spoiled, selfish Alpha Bitch, he's a smart but lazy Conspiracy Theorist slacker. They both can see the improbability of their relationship.
Jackie: Steven, do I really sicken you?
Hyde: No. I sicken me because you're supposed to sicken me, but you don't.
Jackie: Well, I feel the same way.
Odd Friendship: With Red. They become closer when Jackie helps him fix his car. Jackie and Hyde might be the only friends of Eric he actually likes, and Jackie tells Eric to put his father on the phone when she has to say goodbye.
One Head Taller: With Kelso (Mila Kunis is 5'4" and Ashton Kutcher is 6'2").
Parental Abandonment: Her father was arrested and went to jail. Her mother was traveling abroad at the time and was too busy partying to return for months on end. (Jackie and Pam did eventually patch things up, though.) From what we see of Jackie's father before he went to jail, he wasn't a particularly attentive parent either. Red and Kitty are much more like parental figures to her than her own parents.
Petite Pride: She often mocks Donna for her (relatively) large physique, as she goes into narcissistic rants about her gorgeously slender body.
Proud Beauty: So much. It was in many ways the main thing she and Kelso had in common. Often dips in the Screw the Rules, I'm Beautiful! pool.
Relationship Revolving Door: With Kelso. They are dating at the beginning of the series. In season 1, they briefly break up and then get back together twice. In season 2, they break up for a longer time after Jackie finds out that Kelso has been cheating on her with Laurie. They get back together in season 3, but Kelso runs of to California at the end of season 4 because he's afraid that Jackie will push him into marriage. They remain broken up for the rest of the series; Kelso proposes to her in season 8, but she turns him down (much to his relief). That '90s Show reveals that they get back together shortly after the the finale of That '70s Show, had a child together, married and divorced twice and about to get remarried yet again.
Rich Bitch: Jackie is a rich girl who is spoiled, self-centered, and rude. She’s the daughter of a wealthy and successful lawyer.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Energetic Girl to Hyde's Savvy Guy. They had this dynamic long before they were together, as depicted in the episode where he teaches her to be "zen" in order to piss Laurie off. She ends up pulling it off so well, he compliments her for the first time in the series, saying she was totally badass.
Screw the Rules, I Have Money!: She is a firm believer in this approach, though she sometimes needs reminding.
Red: Look, Jackie. I know that things seem grim. But your father's rich, right? Well, then I'm sure that whatever trouble he's in, he'll buy his way out and wriggle free.
Jackie: You're right! I mean, this is America. The rich are treated differently here.
Red: Yep, and I'm so glad I took some shrapnel to make that possible.
Jackie: Me too!
Small Name, Big Ego: She thinks she's the prettiest and most popular girl in Point Place and everyone could benefit from her advice. Others beg to differ.
Spoiled Brat: Especially in the first few seasons, until her father is arrested for embezzlement and her mother takes off to Mexico.
Token Evil Teammate: Along with Hyde, she's the most openly mean in the group. Due to her Alpha Bitch traits, she's snobby and prone to insulting her friends, although she gets better in later episodes.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: Girly girl to Donna's tomboy. Often lampshaded.
Took a Level in Kindness: She evolves into a Lovable Alpha Bitch in later seasons. She seems to have regressed in That '90s Show.
Tsundere: Type A, in all of her relationships.
Uptown Girl: Jackie is a rich girl and cheerleader, Hyde is a poor delinquent with a messed up family who lives with Eric's family because he has nowhere else to go. Initially Hyde stated their differences in social status as a reason they shouldn't go out, as they had nothing in common.
Valley Girl: She acts like one, even though she's from Wisconsin.
Villain Protagonist: She becomes this in "Leaving Home Ain't Easy" when Fez rejects her.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Donna. As much as they live to snark at each other, they're really good friends.
Wasted Beauty: Jackie is frequently repulsing guys with her Rich Bitch attitude. Even when she was dating Hyde, he admits that when she starts going off, he just envisions her in a coconut bikini while relaxing music plays in the background.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: She's terrified of clowns.
Womanchild: "I want what I want when I want it, what is so immature about that?"
Wrench Wench: While the others are at career days with their parents, Jackie goes to the Forman house and helps Red in the garage. She demonstrates a real knack for helping fix the car. This leads to Red and Jackie striking up a sort-off friendship.
"I just fixed a car! I feel like Nancy Drew!"