Abusive Parents: Kitty's parents are quite a doozy...
Hyde: What's wrong with Mrs. Forman's parents?
Kitty: Nothing. They're just...they're very complicated people who can't be summed up in a couple of words.
Eric: Grandma yells, Grandpa drinks.
Red: That pretty much summed it up.
Kitty: Now, that is not true. My father is a wonderful man who just...gets a little sleepy. And my mother, well...fine, is a little remote. Which I have learned through many helpful books makes it impossible for her to say "I love you." Even if it's the only thing in the world a sad little girl needs to hear.
Berserk Button: Don't call her "old" or say anything to imply that she's old. On the other hand, when Kelso and Fez groped her at the supermarket without realizing it was her, she was very happy and thanked them for making her day.
Beware the Nice Ones: Red is usually on the receiving end of this.
Borrowed Catchphrase: When she was really angry at Red, she's threatened to put her foot in his ass or called him a dumbass.
Cluster F-Bomb: Unleashes a magnificent one on Red when Eric appears to be moving out culminating in her calling him a dumbass.
Cock Fight: Discussed. Kitty reacts with disapproval when Red admits Eric is off to fight another man interested in Donna, stating men are such "Neanderthals" fighting over a woman. Though her point is quickly lost when she recounts an instance when Red fought a lifeguard a little too fondly.
Kitty: It's like that time at that beach when that lifeguard pinched my fanny. You just had to lay him out, didn't ya?
Red: Well... yeah.
Kitty: Well how do you think I felt, Red? Watching you stand over that poor man, your eyes burning with intensity, your sun-tanned muscles gleaming like a bronze god.
(Both slowly look at each other, then quickly rush upstairs.)
Comically Missing the Point:
Dirty jokes and humor seem to go over her head quite often.
Bob: I think I got Red's note. The only words I can repeat are "Eric" and a word that starts with "mother..."
Kitty: "Mother"? That's nice!
She somehow never noticed that the kids regularly smoked weed in the basement, to the point that Donna began to think she might have a defective sense of smell. That '90s Show reveals that she thought (or had convinced herself) they were keeping a pet skunk down there.
Covert Pervert: Her and Red's sex life is much more active than it first seems, most of which is enforced by her.
Crash-Into Hello: How she met Red at a USO dance. Red had dropped his pants as part of a prank he played with a friend, while Kitty became as "loose as a goose" and drunkenly tripped over Red. It was love at first sight.
Deadpan Snarker: Just as much as her husband and son, though not as obvious. Red comments that Eric gets his smart-mouth from her.
Disproportionate Retribution: After hitting menopause in season 5 until the end of the series, she becomes much more stubborn towards everyone. Most notably in season 8, she becomes angry with Donna after she caught her making out with Randy in Eric's bedroom. It's later revealed that Kitty was really angry with Eric while he was in Africa and was venting all her anger at Donna.
Doting Grandparent: Downplayed. While she does not dote on Leia as much as Eric, it is clear that Kitty loves her granddaughter very much and is excited to see her during summer. In the first episode of Season 2, she even fights with Gwen (Leia's best friend) and Jay (Leia's boyfriend) over who gets to hug Leia first when she arrives and becomes disappointed when Red beats all three of them.
Doting Parent: She spoils her son even when he is already a full grown man. She shows the same affection to the rest of Eric's friends sans Donna.
Genki Girl: She seems to hate acting her age. She's even more energetic and a bit more crazy than the kids.
Happily Married: To Red. Their relationship is the clearest evidence that beneath Red's exterior is a loving husband and father. Though she does have to work at bringing out his softer side, she's one of the few people who actually can do so with minimum effort.
Hard-Drinking Party Girl: She was this in her youth. At a USO dance, she got "as loose as a goose" and ended up drunkenly tripping and crashing into Red, who'd dropped his pants as part of a prank. It was love at first sight.
Hidden Depths:
She doesn't buy Laurie's good girl act for a second and unlike Red seems to have been wise to her antics for many years. She calls Laurie out on this on more than one occasion.
Seems to be more aware of the kids' drug use than Red. When Eric confesses to using marijuana, she's more worried about him admitting this to Red than the fact he uses it. In a later episode, she even tries it herself.
After a really bad day trying to quit smoking with Red's mother hanging around, she walked into the basement asking for a cigarette from the gang. When Eric played dumb she stated that as a nurse she knew statistically that at least one of them smoked and they'd best hand one over when she closed her eyes.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: As a nurse, she has saved the life of at least one patient - from a doctor who wished to prescribe penicillin to someone allergic to it.
Hypocrite:
A sympathetic example; she detests the idea of Eric smoking cigarettes even though she smokes herself (and admits that as a nurse she knows all about the adverse effects of it). Rather than laying into her, Eric accepts his Mom just has trouble quitting the habit, as seen when he's sympathetic to her failed attempts to give it up.
Despite giving Hyde a party for his 18th birthday and being very upset when Red and Eric forget her own birthday, she didn't even bother doing anything for Eric (a.k.a. her favorite child) turning 18. She cared more about resuming her sex life with Red. Although it's probably justified since Eric hates when his mom does stuff for his birthday. note 
I Was Quite the Looker: While by no means ugly (she's even refered to as a hot mom by Fez and Kelso, especially after Midge left), she's no longer in her prime, being middle aged and menopausal with two children. In her youth, she was homecoming queen and considered one of the prettiest girls in town.
Lady Drunk: Kitty is revealed to have a somewhat dependent relationship with alcohol, mostly after she hits menopause.
Male Gaze: This was Played for Laughs on the Season 4 Ep. 6 where Kelso and Fez set out chasing for older housewives at the Piggly Wiggly grocery store; both guys (and camera POV) soon notice one older woman bending over with her ass in the air reaching for an item. Kelso grope her buttocks before running away, leaving Fez to face the woman.........only to turn out to be Kitty, much to their surprise.
Morality Pet: She's this to Red and Hyde, bringing out the best in them much to their frustration.
My Beloved Smother: Certainly has her moments to Eric and sometimes Hyde. And also to Fez.
Nice Girl: She is the nicest person on the show despite some justified slips in the latter season for being unappreciated or succumbing to menopause moods.
Only Known by Their Nickname: She's known as "Kitty".
OOC Is Serious Business: She is very upset when Eric and Donna decide to move away right after graduation, when she had assumed Eric would at least stay for the summer. She goes out to Red in the yard and rants at him for giving Eric is blessing to leave, complete with Cluster F-Bomb, then calls him a "dumbass" and storms off, leaving Red shell-shocked.
Parental Favoritism: For Eric since, unlike Red, she has no illusions about Laurie.
Parental Sexuality Squick: Despite hitting middle age, she and Red are still very attracted to each other, and have an active sex life, much to Eric's horror when he once walked in on them.
Parental Substitute: Kitty mothers the teenagers as if they were her own children, and tries to help them with their problems, even going so far as to adopt Hyde after his mother abandons him. Red also ends up getting involved on more than one occasion, much to his displeasure.
Parents as People: She loves her kids and tries to be a good parent, but she is deeply traumatized by a rough childhood and her job as a nurse, and often drinks to cope. As a result of this, she sometimes ends up neglecting (Laurie) or smothering her children (Eric) and her surrogate children and being a little too controlling.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Kitty and Red are the grown-up versions of this.
Shipper on Deck: She encourages Eric and Donna to be together during the early stages of their relationship. This takes a hit when she learns Eric and Donna have had sex, but comes back in full force at the end of Season 4 when Eric rejects Donna and convinces him to get back together with Donna.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Only in the 2nd of Season 5, when she and Red objected to Eric and Donna's engagement plans and took measures to obstruct the pair. Outside of that, she still remains the Team Mom for the kids.
Stepford Smiler: Very, very heavily implied to be one. When she takes Eric to the hospital for career day, he sees her handle corpses, talk to dying people, and treat the already dead like numbers. When he asks her how she copes with it all, combined with the added stress of her family, she turns the radio up to maximum volume and starts singing over him.
Supreme Chef: Several characters note that she's a good cook. This apparently has her showing emotions through cooking, such as when her hated mother-in-law died, and Kitty, full of grief and having no idea how to express it, spent days cooking instead.
Team Mom: She mothers everyone in the gang, to Red's constant irritation.
Took a Level in Jerkass: When she hits menopause in Season 5 onward, Kitty becomes a lot more of a neurotic, dramatic and erratic Control Freak. Remember when Kitty was just a regular housewife and occasional Straight Man to the others, instead of an alcoholic nag who was obsessed with her son to a creepy degree?
Where Did We Go Wrong?: With Laurie.