Abusive Parents: Downplayed example towards Donna. She had no problem up and leaving Donna without a warning to her family of where she would go because she often felt unhappy and stole Bob's car. She also had no problem doing sexual acts with Bob around Donna much to her disgust and often belittled Donna's more feminist beliefs while using them as an excuse to be neglectful. This appears to be out of ignorance and honest stupidity, as it's made clear on several occasions and tender interactions that she does care about her daughter.
Brainless Beauty: She is seen as the sexy neighborhood mom, but she's also dimwitted.
Bus Crash: Not outright stated, but in Season 2 of That '90s Show Kitty is excited about Bob moving back to Point Place since, quote, "all the grandparents would be in the same place", and in another episode Bob mentions Midge in past tense. Combined with Tanya Roberts' passing, this appears to be a case of The Character Died with Him.
Buxom Beauty Standard: She's a Lust Object among the boys because of her huge breasts. So much that once she leaves the show the boys imagine a montage for her "sweet uptown rack".
The Ditz: Extremely spacey and simple-minded, much to the exasperation of Donna and her neighbors Red and Kitty.
Dumb Blonde: At one point, she locks herself in a bathroom. Two separate characters tell her the lock is on the doorknob. The first time, she responds that she's staying locked in on purpose, but "I see it now, thanks."
Foreshadowing: Bob and Midge were shown experiencing (rather hilarious) marriage difficulties in multiple episodes before their divorce in season 4. In fact, her very last line before leaving was "I'm unhappy, Bob."
Hidden Depths:
Despite her chipper attitude, sexy exterior, and low intelligence, anyone who pays attention can see Midge is deeply unsatisfied and unhappy with being a housewife to Bob. Deeper than that, Midge has a pessimistic view on the world around her, and her advice to Donna is often very cynical and pragmatic. When Donna is conflicted if she should forgive Eric for a recent fight, Midge simply explains that it doesn't matter; they're a high school romance that will probably break up when they go to college. This advice leaves Donna rather stunned, but she takes it to heart and chooses to appreciate the time she has with Eric.
An early example of this is when Jackie has a pregnancy scare and Donna, anxious about her relationship with Eric, goes to Midge for emotional support. Midge cuts to the heart of the issue, Donna being worried she might wind up pregnant as well, then not only gives her advice about the subject but arranges for her to get birth control. In a later scene with Bob, Midge says she's proud to have a daughter handled the situation as intelligently as she did.
Put on a Bus: She leaves Bob in Season 4 and moves to California. She then comes back in Season 6, but leaves again in Season 7, which is the last we see of her. She’s implied to be deceased by the time That '90s Show rolls around.
Sexy Sweater Girl: When Midge left Bob in "The Relapse," the boys lament over losing "her sweet uptown rack".
Fez: Oh, good God, man, what a marvelous set of kittens. Remember that sweater?
Kelso: Oh. Remember the other sweater?
Eric: Yeah. Remember that time she ran up to us in a sweater?
Hyde: Remember the week she took up jump rope? In a sweater?
Simple-Minded Wisdom: Despite being a prime example of The Ditz, Midge is often able to cut to the heart of problems by Stating the Simple Solution (even if the simple solution is painful), and Donna regularly comes to her when she needs advice. One of the biggest examples is when Donna is upset about Eric missing their wedding, and Midge tells her the honest facts; she can try to forgive Eric and keep their relationship going, or cut him out of her life and move on. Either option would be painful, but she has to pick the one that will ultimately make her happy.
Stacy's Mom: The boys have fantasized and made lewd comments about her, and even spied on her. Fez and Kelso fell prostrate and worshipped Eric when they mistakenly believed he'd shagged her. The fanboys also love her because of her looks.
Straw Feminist: Played for Laughs, Midge has no actual understanding of feminism and was just swept up in the early feminism fad of the 70s.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: She's a beautiful woman married to Bob, a chubby and unattractive guy. Until she leaves him.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom:
Her abrupt departure in Season 4 causes Donna a world of emotional turmoil that culminates in dating Casey Kelso. Eric reasons that it's why Donna couldn't see what others could.
She's also indirectly responsible for Eric and Donna's breakup as her observation that Donna and Eric would likely break up after high school anyway caused Donna to treat their relationship less seriously than Eric did.