Abusive Parents: His mother loved and doted on him, but his father was a real bastard. Red's parenting is positively lax in comparison.
Actually Pretty Funny: Red has a few moments like this throughout the series.
When Eric confesses the last words to Red's mother were "It wouldn't kill you to be nice for once in your life", before she dropped dead, Red can't help but laugh at the fact and tells him it's okay.
When Kelso is "canoeing" in the street, which involves a canoe being dragged by rope attached to a car, Red can't help but enjoy the spectacle of misplaced bravery and childlike glee.
Red: "Look at that crazy bastard. He may not be smart but he has more fun than all of us combined."
Anger Born of Worry: When Hyde takes the fall for Jackie having pot, Red is ready to kick him out. Once the truth comes out and Hyde comes home, Red explodes at him for his stupidity. Red ends his tirade by threatening to kick Hyde's ass so hard his nose will bleed if he ever does something this stupid again. When Red confirms Hyde isn't kicked out, it's clear he's relieved Hyde is alright and his yelling was to just blow off steam from being worried about Hyde.
Ass Shove: While he's always threatening to put his foot in someone's ass, he's only ever done it once and that was on Iwo Jima. It's not stated whether it was an enemy or an incompetent comrade (or even superior officer).
Bald of Authority: As the head of the household, Red balances discipline and affection with his family.
Being Good Sucks: He initially refused to take Hyde in after his mom split, as money was already pretty tight. Then he sees the squalid living conditions, and Kitty points out Hyde would fall through the cracks of social services. Red sees he has no choice and tells Hyde to pack up... amid a massive Cluster F-Bomb for the ages.
Berserk Button:
Ignorance and stupidity. For his sins he runs into both on a regular basis.
He also hates it whenever someone mocks America in any way.
He doesn't take kindly to anyone putting the moves on Kitty.
For all he yells at and snarks at Eric, he will get very mad if anyone else mistreats, demeans or threatens him.
Big Good: The one character that most others- children and adults- rely on the most. Much to his chagrin, unfortunately.
Blatant Lies: Red says he "took it like a man" after his first break up. Well....
Boyfriend-Blocking Dad: The number one reason everyone told Kelso not to talk about dating Laurie. Red rather effortlessly scares him into line.
Cannot Spit It Out: He really, really hates expressing his feelings, especially to other men. He usually only openly praises Eric or tells him he loves him when he's drunk or high on novocaine. When he's not, Red only says things in a really roundabout way, such as ordering Eric to go out and mow the lawn before adding that "the...lawn" thanks him for staying home to help the family after Red suffered a heart attack and Kitty was depressed over her menopause.
Can't Act Perverted Toward a Love Interest: Kitty is briefly jealous when she meets the woman Red dated before her and learns that he would constantly try to feel her up in the movie theatre, when the most he ever did with her in the same situation was hold her hand. Red explains that he respected her too much to make a move on her in the dark.
Catchphrase:
"Dumbass!"
"I'll put my foot up your ass" and all variations thereof.
Characterization Marches On: Two notable instances:
While still calling his son a dumbass and threatening to insert his foot into anyone's ass, Red was less of a jerkass and more accepting of Eric in the first season. He even hugged him after spending an entire episode bonding. As the series goes on, Red becomes more accustomed to his jerkass personality trait and can't even bring himself to hug anyone.
While Red would later be characterized as a Nixon supporter, even going as far as to believe that Nixon was set up for Watergate, in the Season 1 episode "Streaking", he publicly condemned Ford to his face about pardoning Nixon.note 
Closer to Earth: A rare Gender Flip in that Kitty is the one to usually have neurotic reactions while he's the one who keeps her grounded.
The Comically Serious: Red often inadvertently slips into this given his reluctance to avoid outward affection. Kitty will actually prey on this to snap him out of being so serious or simply just for her own amusement.
Cool Car: Red buys a powder blue C1 '58 Corvette in season 4.
Cool Old Guy:
A badass veteran of two wars, unfailingly faithful to his wife, loves his family immensely and beneath that grim exterior: He's pretty funny too. He also takes in Hyde, even though Red's struggling financially, just so Hyde will avoid becoming another statistic.
Played straight in That ‘90s Show. While caring for Leia over the summer, he’s the more laid-back grandparent compared to Kitty. The new kids even seem to enjoy being around him for the most part.
Crash-Into Hello: How he met Kitty at a USO dance. Red had dropped his pants as part of a prank he played with a friend, while Kitty became as "loose as a goose" and drunkenly tripped over Red. It was love at first sight.
Crazy Jealous Guy:
Downplayed. When Red and Kitty were dating, he punched out another beachgoer who was giving Kitty the eye. He also yelled at Leo when the latter seemed to be hitting on Kitty. Though in the former case the guy had pinched her on the ass, and in the latter case he was more amused about Leo's crush on Kitty, not taking it seriously as a threat, more annoyed that Leo was showing him up in the romance department, getting him in trouble, so he poorly acts the part of one.
Red actually poked fun at himself for this particular aspect. When Bob told Red that he saw Hyde hitting on Kitty, Red's immediate response was to make a death threat on Hyde. For context, Red was the one who referred Hyde to Kitty for dance lessons, so it was pretty obvious he knew Kitty was just teaching Hyde how to dance. His crazy response was just a hint to Bob to consider the more logical possibility that it was just a misunderstanding.
Dad the Veteran: Veteran of two wars, and quite proud of it.
Deadpan Snarker: A quality shared with his son. Especially around the other adults who annoy him. Amusingly he claims Eric's "smartmouth" comes from his mother Kitty, though the evidence might just be against him on that one.
Doting Grandparent: He has a great camaraderie with his granddaughter, Leia, and is not afraid to be affectionate towards her unlike with his son. He also isn't as strict with her as he was with Eric; when he caught Leia at a rave party instead of the movies like she claimed to be, it was Kitty who grounded her while Red was simply happy that she was safe and sound. Of course, he has his limits like with Laurie and wasn't happy with her dating a Kelso.
The Dreaded:
The teenagers of Point Place generally feared Red to the extent of running away when he approached. He liked that, and wasn't thrilled when an upset Jackie hugged him. He makes a lot adults nervous too, as a labor board mediator told Red he scared the hell out of him, and Red wasn't at all offended. Even the police felt sorry for Eric when they learned he was Red's son.
Fridge Brilliance: when we see Red in his chief's dress uniform, he has red chevrons and rocker, meaning that he left active duty with fewer than 12 consecutive years of good conduct. He either made chief lightning fast (extremely hard to do) or he was awarded nonjudicial punishment as a chief (extremely rare). A "red chief" is very, very rare, and definitely not someone to trifle with.
Subverted in the sequel. Though Jay Kelso is mildly intimidated by Red, he’s otherwise adored by the new generation of kids.
Drill Sergeant Nasty: More implied than anything else, but as he was a chief petty officer during his days in the Navy, he was probably this trope.
Drugs Are Good: Despite his usual gruff demeanor, he once accidentally ate Hyde’s special brownies and got toasted- hilariously so. He is basically a different person while high, which only adds to the comedy.
Red: [regarding his selling Eric’s car] “I sold it to a guy named Peter. Peter...cottontail. Hoppin’ down the bunny trail-“
Dying Declaration of Love: According to Red, this is one of three times that a man telling another man he loves him is okay. The other two usually involve copious amounts of liquor.
Emotionally Tongue-Tied: He struggles with expressing his positive emotions. Especially with Eric. An incident involving him being drugged by the dentist involved him telling a visibly stunned Eric that he loved him. In the awkward aftermath, Red states under rare circumstances men can say "that phrase" (ie. drunk, dying or to get out of trouble) and at all other times "It's just a given." Eric picks up on the obvious implication of that statement, much to Red's horror.
Red: Other than that. It's just a given.
Eric: Oh. Hey, you just kinda told me...
Red: No I didn't.
Enraged by Idiocy: When he blows his top, he often has a good reason for doing so.
Expy: Red is very similar to Archie Bunker of All in the Family in many ways; they're both irritable, conservative veterans and hardass fathers, although Red lacks the prejudices that were at the core of Archie's character and he is also notably more intelligent.
The Fatalist: Red becomes more fatalistic over the series and becomes more predictive of the zany antics of those around him. Best exemplified in his pessimistic advice to Eric while dealing with a menopause-ridden Kitty.
For Your Own Good: His approach to raising Eric. It has little to no effect, as Eric simply tries to sneak around his father.
Good Is Not Nice: His belief with parenting. Sometimes, it's fitting. Other times, not so much.
Good Parents: Red may be strict, but he is an excellent father when compared to his son's friends' parents. He is not neglectful like Hyde and Jackie's parents, he enforces discipline unlike Donna's parents, and he is not a dumbass like Kelso's parents. He ensures that Eric is not squandering his life and honors his choices as long as he stays true to his word. Red also shows the same care towards his son's friends, to the extent that Hyde and Jackie view him as a better father figure than their own. In the sequel series, he dotes on his granddaughter and isn't as tough on her as he is with Eric.
Graceful Loser: He spends the latter part of Season 5 doing everything he can to break up Eric and Donna's engagement: fires Eric from his job, won't pay for college, and whatever else he can think of to make the boy's life difficult. Eric refuses to back down—even saying he and Donna will just move to Madison after graduation. Red thinks this over and completely relents, congratulating Eric for standing up to him.
Grandparent Favoritism: Is much more openly loving and affectionate and less stern and overbearing towards his granddaughter Leia than his son Eric.
Green Thumb: In between series, Red had taken up gardening and set up a vegetable garden in the yard. He's only half good at it however as his crops tend to be very small.
Hair-Trigger Temper: It doesn't take much to get Red angry.
Happily Married: Despite his comical sitcom grumblings about the hardship of marriage, he is very much this with Kitty. To the point where he is visibly disgusted with the idea of cheating on her, such as when he finds out his old war buddy had invited him to a swingers party, and that a young saleswoman at Price Mart had a crush on him. The thought of straying doesn't even enter his mind.
Red (Caught Eric fooling around with Donna in a hotel room): What the hell are you doing here?
Eric: Wait, what are YOU doing here? Oh my god, who are you with?
Red: Your mother, you dumbass!
Hey, You!:
Red calling Eric and co "dumbasses".
Red tends to call Fez "the foreign kid," or by a random foreign name (such as Hadji, Anwar, Sabu, Ali Baba, Pelé, Ahmad, Stalin and Tutankhamun) and rarely by his name. By the 90s however, Red has become mellow enough to refer Fez by his name.
Hidden Depths: For all his conservative leanings, he seems to have no issue with homosexuality and gets along extremely well with a gay couple, at least until finding out they were fans of an opposing sports team.
Horrible Judge of Character: Especially when it comes to Laurie. Eventually, he does come round to seeing her for what she is and taking more pride in how well Eric turned out.
Hypocritical Humor:
Frequently insults Eric for being a smartass but there are plenty of times when he's a smartass himself.
Calls basically everyone a dumbass but when someone calls him one, he gets pissed off about it. Though it's not about the insult, it's because his authority is being challenged.
Iconic Outfit: Usually wears button-up shirts, most of which are usually flannels, either trousers or jeans and dress shoes.
Inelegant Blubbering: He really didn't take his first break up well.
Informed Attribute: Everyone treats him like a strict hardass, but he's really rather lenient, especially for the time the show is set. This is likely because from what little we hear, Red's own father was borderline abusive. Red does go too far sometimes but is generally tough but fair. However part of this reputation seems to stem from his zero tolerance for stupidity and the frequency he seems to encounter idiotic behaviour. Anyone who has seen him vent his anger at a dumbass, which isn't rare, would probably believe that he's always a hardass. His abusive "kicking your ass" threats are almost always played for laughs and never materialized.
I Resemble That Remark!: When Red asks his son for an honest opinion about him, he not only offers no objection but is actually visibly impressed by the accuracy of the answer.
Eric: "I think you're angry because life didn't turn out exactly the way you wanted it to. And, uh, maybe you think if you yell at me, I won't let life push me around too."
Red: "You came up with that answer awful fast. Hell Eric, maybe you'll be okay."
I Was Quite the Looker: Like his wife, Red isn't ugly now (and in fact attracts a much younger woman at one point, much to his horror) but he was a real stud in his youth, as shown in flashbacks to his teenage years.
Jerkass Has a Point: While sometimes he can go a bit too far with his hard-ass parenting antics, Eric and his friends really are as irresponsible and immature as he thinks they are. One particular point of note took more than an entire season to materialize - He obstructed Eric and Donna's engagement in the 2nd half of Season 5, sensibly pointing out they were too young to be thinking of marriage. While Red backed off by the end of of the season, he was eventually vindicated by the next season's ending, when Eric admitted he's not actually ready for marriage.
Jerkass to One: Michael Kelso remains at the forefront of Red's list of disliked individuals due to his foolishness and knack for creating trouble. Even after mellowing out in the sequel series, he still hates the Kelso family as a whole to the point of extending his hatred to Michael's son, Jay — who unlike the other males in his family, is a rather polite and respectful young man.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: The biggest and most prominent example in this show. He was turned into a stubborn, prideful and short-tempered hardass by both his upbringing by his even sterner father and his experience in the war, but underneath the harsh exterior is a good, honest, hardworking family man. And while the kids tend to view him as an antagonistic killjoy whom they try not to cross paths with, almost just as often he shows moments of kindness and generosity.
Eric thinks he's The Un-Favorite son to Red, but Red's own perspective is quite different. As revealed in a conversation with Bud, Red thinks that teenagers are stupid, need a parent figure to push them in the right direction, and a tough approach works just fine. And Red expects more from Eric than he does from either Laurie or his foster son Hyde. In fact, in Red's own world view, Eric is arguably the true favourite.
When Eric fell into a depression from the first breakup in his relationship with Donna, Red took Eric to a bar for a beer and empathized with his situation, which was one of the show's more heartwarming family moments.
Or how about the fact that he took Hyde in as his foster son for several seasons after learning that Hyde's parents abandoned him, though not without cursing and grumbling at the increased expense.
When Hyde was arrested and put on probation for drug possession, Red wanted to throw him out of the house. So when Red found out that Hyde was only taking the fall for Jackie, he still lost his temper and strongly berated Hyde for risking his own future over a misguided moment of chivalry... And then forgave him and allowed him to stay on.
Red had been livid with Fez for marrying his daughter, and when Immigration Services came in to check on Fez, Red was inclined to tell them the truth. At the last moment however, he relented, and the marriage was officially deemed as legitimate. He even (inadvertently) admits that Fez is family.
Jock Dad, Nerd Son: Insofar as Red can be considered less of a jock and more of a man's man, he loves hunting, sports, and is generally masculine, whereas Eric is nerdy and laid-back.
Know When to Fold 'Em: Red might like being the man of the house, and getting his own way most of the time, but he instantly falls into line whenever Kitty puts her foot down or makes it clear that a subject is off-limits.
Leaning on the Fourth Wall: In That '90s Show, Red is angry that Kitty has "opened their house to chaos again", especially since things were calm when "all the dumbasses were gone".
Lethal Chef: When he tries to cook, the results are not very good.
Like a Son to Me: He treats Hyde much like this when he allows him to move in. He's notably more lenient with him than with his actual son at times, but that's mostly chalked up to Hyde's independence and Red thinking Eric needs more guidance.
Like Father, Unlike Son: The masculine, traditional hardass Red is nothing like the nerdy and laid-back Eric.
Mad Libs Catchphrase: Replacing the words in well-known phrases and/or whatever was just said to him with "my foot" and "your ass", typically implying the kicking thereof.
Mean Boss: To be fair, the people that work for him do tend to be really stupid. When he gets the manager's job at Price Mart, Hyde congratulates him by saying "God help the poor bastards who work for you!" Red only smiles and laughs, taking it as a compliment.
Misery Builds Character: Red rides Eric pretty hard when he screws up or gets lazy. He sincerely believes that making him miserable now will make him a well-adjusted, happy adult. The results are mixed to say the least, as Eric gets increasingly frustrated and feels stifled by Red's strictness, and starts getting rebellious, but he did grow up with a strong moral center.
Never My Fault: Tends to blame Eric for things that are his own fault, or that both of them together are responsible, such as when they both forgot Kitty's birthday. He was especially low enough to blame Eric for wrecking Bob's barbecue, not knowing that Bob was losing his store, when it was all of Red's fault as he started the barbecue war first due to jealousy and couldn't admit he was wrong... at least, until he went over to repair the damage he'd done to Bob and helped him get Bob's barbecue back into full swing, as well as apologize for it.
Noble Bigot: Parodied in one episode when he found out his two new male neighbors were actually a homosexual couple. While initially very uncomfortable with it, he seemed to be getting past it... until he found out they were VIKINGS FANS and threw them out on their ear.
Noodle Incident: Hyde had this conversation with him after yet another "foot in ass" threat:
Hyde: You ever actually do that with your foot?
Red: Once, at Iwo Jima. I can't talk about that.
Not So Above It All: For all his talk, Red is usually willing to be immature too. Examples include feeding the boys dead moths as revenge for a prank gone wrong, openly refusing to go to church, bluntly refusing to help people move, being unable to keep a straight face when talking about Eric killing Donna's cat, stealing Bob's annoying Christmas decorations, and buying a motorcycle with his first paycheck instead of investing it in the family.
Odd Friendship: He and Kelso of all people get together every now and then to play video games, which, being the mid-to-late 70's amounted to Pong.
Once an Episode: Red threatening to put his foot up someone's ass and/or calling someone a dumbass.
Only Known by Their Nickname: His mother was the first person to call him Red before everyone else does so. A casual viewer could be forgiven for not even knowing what his full name is.
Only Sane Man: The sanest of the adults and the only one who's on the ball when it comes to the kids' antics.
Open Mouth, Insert Foot: Red sometimes has this problem with Kitty, especially after she hits menopause.
Papa Wolf: No one gives his son crap except him and this sentiment extends to Hyde as well, who becomes an adopted son.
Parental Favoritism: He favors Laurie over Eric, as he's oblivious to the fact that she's the town slut. Though this stops in season 5 when he finally realizes her true character. He also seems to favor Hyde, his pseudo-adopted son, over Eric. In Red's own perspective however, it is strongly hinted that Eric is his true favorite.
In addition, while Red dotes on Laurie, it's revealed he doesn't think she's capable of much and really just sees her as a good wife to a husband who will take care of her. Meanwhile, Red is hard on Eric because he expects more from him.
Parental Substitute: For all Eric's friends but especially Hyde. He complains about this at one point when Jackie runs and hugs him at one point, and says he liked it better when everyone was afraid of him.
Parents as People: Red wants to help Eric become a good man but his bad temper, old-fashioned ideas of what constitutes manhood and the fact that he's had to make do without a positive male role model from his own life to emulate means he often comes up short. For all his flaws and often misplaced harshness, Red does care very much about Eric and is proud of the fact that his son is an intelligent, honest and good-natured young man.
A Real Man is a Killer:
Red enjoys killing things, ranging from the deer and fish he kills during his hunting and fishing trips to the squirrels that he shoots with a pellet gun. He occasionally goes on solo hunting and fishing trips when he's very angry and needs to cool down, and Eric noted that Red found gutting worms on a hook to be very therapeutic.
That said, on a hunting trip, when Eric missed an easy shot on a deer, Red initially berated him for it, but relented when Eric made a much more difficult shot on a tin can. When Eric explains he had missed on purpose because he didn't want to kill the deer, rather than just being a lousy shot, Red can't help but respect Eric's conviction.
Overall he seems to zig-zag whether he applies this to other people based on what would be funnier.
Red: I killed people, never said that I didn't enjoy it.
Real Men Eat Meat: In one episode Red's doctor tells him to watch his cholesterol. Kitty prepares him a healthy breakfast of fruits and vegetables, and Red is horrified at the prospect of not being able to eat meat.
Red: This isn't food! This is what food eats!
Real Men Hate Affection: Is incredibly uncomfortable with showing affection in public, especially to Eric, making his few displays of affection particularly poignant.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He really is underneath it all. It's especially notable because it was implied several times that Red's father was much worse. The only time he really overstepped into it was the appropriately titled "Red Sees Red."
Red has also let Eric off easy when he did things that pissed Red off for reasons Red would approve of, like winning a prank war with Kelso or getting a date with a hot cheerleader.
He was even this to Kelso when the latter started messing with his tools and video game system to try and make Pong more exciting. Red not only agreed with Kelso's thinking Pong was boring, they actually teamed up to improve the game and even faced off on it.
Red Hot Masculinity: Played with. Red is gruff, no-nonsense and enjoys stereotypical masculine pastimes like sports, hunting, and fishing. While he doesn't exclusively wear the color red, his nickname does invoke this trope.
The Reliable One: One of the most level-headed members of the cast, he's the one everyone turns to the most to solve their problems.
Resigned to the Call: Red really didn't want to care about the problems caused by Donna and Casey's relationship. Despite pleas for his help, he refused on the grounds that Donna's not his kid and that he has enough on his plate with Eric and Hyde. However, after seeing how completely hapless Bob was at dealing with the situation, Red decided enough was enough and took charge.
Retired Badass: He's a veteran of World War 2 and Korea.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Red and Kitty are the grown-up versions of this.
Selective Obliviousness: While mostly playing the Only Sane Man towards the kids, he has his own moments from time to time. Notably Laurie's promiscuity... until he saw that for himself with his own eyes. Another notable moment pops up in Season 5 when Eric did horribly in his S.A.T.s.
Red: You! What happened on the S.A.T.s?!
Eric: I don't know. Maybe I'm not smart.
Red: Who said you're not smart?
Eric: You!
Red: When?!
Eric: Always!
Red: Your problem is you've got your head up your ass!
Shell-Shocked Veteran: In one episode Kitty claimed that she'd had to throw away a pellet gun Red bought to shoot chipmunks that were stealing their tomatoes, because it was giving him "war nightmares" (which is odd, since he was already well-established as enjoying hunting).
Shipper on Deck: Lowkey, but he does encourage Eric to be with Donna and enjoy the time together while they have it. In fact, it's him and Kitty calling Eric out for rejecting her when she was dumped by Casey that inspires Eric to take her back for real.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: On many occasions he is this to Eric, and most of the other kids generally try to steer clear of him when planning their activities, viewing him as an antagonistic killjoy. Notably, in the 2nd half of Season 5, he and even Kitty herself took a more proactive role in obstructing and derailing Eric and Donna's engagement plans. However, it’s downplayed overall as compared to that of Laurie, in the sense that while Red does exhibits all traits of this trope, he's just as much a principal character as the kids are, and often he has his own subplots going on in the same episode.
So Proud of You:
It becomes clear he is very proud of how Eric turned out after all. He even tells Eric this on a number of occasions, especially when he strikes out on his own. Though the most touching instance is when Eric is leaving for Africa.
And in That 90s Show, when Eric tries the 'foot in your ass' line on his own daughter, he could not be prouder.
Surrounded by Idiots: For the most part he finds himself dealing with a dumbass on a fairly regular basis.
Team Dad: Much to his chagrin, of course. He could've had a Corvette! And his house is filled with kids, it's like he and Kitty are... MORMONS!
Teen Hater: Red harbors a strong dislike for the youngsters in Point Place, mostly because he thinks they're annoying and wasting on their youth. He's even mentioned how happy he is when the neighborhood kids avoid him. In the sequel series, as much he loves Leia, he is notably upset when his granddaughter brings her friends over, disrupting his cherished peace.
Tin Man: Despite believing that he lacks feelings and encourages the idea of bottling them up, he's shown to be very sensitive to the point of breaking down into a blubbering wreck when he was dumped by his first-ever girlfriend in his teenage years.
Took a Level in Kindness:
Debatable in which season it began, however Red is a little more supportive towards Eric from Season 6 onwards, partly due to having to worry about his own heart instead and partly due to coming down from the earlier Season 5 where Red was at his peak antagonism. By season 8, Red is much less hardnosed than he was in the past.
This carries over into That ‘90s Show, where from the start, he’s much nicer towards his granddaughter Leia and her friends than he ever was to Eric.
Where Did We Go Wrong?: With Eric. Despite Red's best efforts, Eric simply has no interest or ability in the things Red considers important such as sports or mechanics. Although he is actually very proud of him, partly because he's been brave enough to go his own way.