Actually Pretty Funny: When Janice says that Richie's time in prison has given him a deeper sensitivity to the plight of women. Carmela can't help but laugh at the absurdity of the statement.
Affectionate Nickname: "Carm". Her father sometimes calls her "Mel" or "Mellie".
All for Nothing: She desperately wants her daughter Meadow to be able to escape the Mafia life, and goes out of her way to shield the latter from its excesses. But she keeps hammering into Meadow that the government persecutes Italians (Mafiosos) until she makes her believe it. Sadly, it ends up amounting to nothing once Meadow herself decides to become a lawyer who defends mobsters.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: Tends to state that Tony being a gangster makes their courtship more exciting, in spite of all the problems it brings her personally. Later on, she lusts after Furio, one of Tony's most ruthless enforcers.
Alpha Bitch: Much like how Tony often still acts like a high school jock, Carmela often acts just like a high school girl who is at the top of the social hierarchy, such as whenever she goes out of her way to show off her latest luxury purchases to her friends.
Book Dumb: While far from stupid, Carmela lacks the Book Smarts Meadow has, making her rather ignorant in regards to film and literature. Best shown when she decides to help AJ with one of his essays for school, and he still only gets a "C".
Consummate Liar: She's better at this than even Tony, which says a lot. She never gets caught in her deceptions:
She never admits to having stolen $40,000 from Tony's birdfeeder, no matter how often it comes up.
Long after Meadow Soprano has figured out that her father is a member of the Mafia, Carmela continues to uphold the deception that Tony and his ilk are unfairly persecuted by the government for being Italian-Americans. Played for Drama: She's so good at this that she ends up making Meadow Believe, making her become a lawyer to defend Mobsters.
She has had three affairs of varying intimacy while she and Tony are married. The only one Tony finds out about (the one with Furio) is the one she goes out of her way to tell him about in a fit of anger, and it's her most chaste affair.
She throws Meadow's acceptance letter to Berkeley in the trash in order to prevent Meadow from jumping at the chance to move to California, then plays innocent when Meadow finds it stained from the trash later on in the same episode after Meadow has received other compelling acceptances.
Deadpan Snarker: Carmela is always armed with a wisecrack, whether in response to Tony's questionable behavior, A.J.'s dumber decisions or Meadow's more pretentious ramblings.
Distracted by the Luxury: At her core, Carmela is unfailingly drawn to the material possessions Tony's line of work enables him to purchase for her, in spite of all the conflicts they've had over the years, and continue to have during the series proper. David Chase even describes her as being something of an ascended Gold Digger.
Egocentrically Religious: She uses religion mainly as means to absolve herself of her complicity in her husband's crimes, as well as an excuse to spend time with Father Phil.
Everyone Has Standards:
When she learns that AJ's science teacher had his car stolen she asks if Tony can help find it. When Tony implies that he can use it as leverage to raise AJ's D+ in the class, Carmela objects, saying he needs to earn those grades.
She's as horrified as everyone else by Coach Hauser's relationship with Ally and correctly shuts Tony down when he suggests there may have been "confusion" involved.
Fatal Flaw: She has two:
Carmela has a nasty case of insecurity. Despite being financially stable because of her marriage to Tony, deep down she wants to make something of herself and branch out, but completely lacks any of the motivation or skills to do so, due to having nestled herself into the role of a pampered housewife for so long. This often makes her jealous of some of the other wives, such as Angie Bonpensiero, who have managed to create a successful life for themselves.
Denial: Carmela struggles with being married to Tony deep down, but she's often running and/or distracting her conscience with bullshit justifications or the material wealth that Tony's lifestyle provides.
Female Misogynist: Carmela really likes to tear down successful women.
She looks down on Angie Bonpensiero when she is doing badly, and goes out of her way to avoid her when she sees Angie working in a grocery store. Later on when Tony buys her a Porsche, she makes a big show of parading it in front of Angie and Ginny Sack, both of whom were left financially struggling after the deaths of their husbands. Angie politely shuts her up by revealing the new Corvette she bought (in cash, no less!) with the profits she earned from running Big Pussy’s body shop.
Meadow's friend Hunter got kicked out of college and Carmela silently mocked her for it. When Hunter reappears near the end of the series, she tells Carmela she straightened up and got into med school and you can see the light go out of Carmela's eyes.
She more than once uses her husband's position to put the squeeze on women with authority.
Gold Digger: She enjoys the big house, expensive clothes and jewelry, no need of a job, and ability to use her husband's connections to get her things that Tony's criminal activities bring in, putting up with a lot of abuse simply because she refuses to give it all up.
Hiding Behind Religion: Carmela uses the Catholic Church's doctrine regarding marriage as a justification for staying married to Tony despite his line of work and infidelity.
High-School Sweethearts: They started dating in high school in the 1970s, before Tony properly joined The Mafia. The Many Saints of Newark depicts a young Carmella in a brief scene.
Hot for Preacher: Close, but no cigar. She has some Unresolved Sexual Tension with Father Intintola and they almost do something midway through Season 1, but it doesn't happen. She surmises, quite aptly, that he gets off on the "whiff of sexuality" (with food being tied to it somehow) from their interactions and tries to cut him off. He makes sporadic appearances later on, during which it is implied that he still possesses some feelings for her.
Housewife: Her role throughout most of the series. Indeed, even when considering divorce from Tony, she has no real ideas for what she would do after going independent.
The Hypocrite: Her other defining character trait. For instance:
Her most common defense against the accusations that she's materialistic from other characters (particularly Tony) is that she doesn't actually need the luxuries Tony provides her and can easily give them up if she chooses. But anytime she has to opportunity to put her money where her mouth is, she never follows through.
She calls out Tony on the dirtier aspects of his profession but has no problem with the luxurious lifestyle it gives her and later calls upon his corrupt influence to get her spec house approved for construction.
Encourages Meadow to seek options in her life, but has no prospects or aspirations for her own life after planning to divorce Tony beyond seeking a significant alimony. Meadow calls her out on this.
Implicitly blames Tony for AJ believing that "the world owes him a fucking living," in Tony's words from 3x13, "The Army of One", but explicitly feels entitled to Tony's illicit earnings, as she states to Tony in 5x09, "Unidentified Black Males."
Speaking of AJ, she constantly complains about how lazy and disrespectful the boy is and that he needs to be straightened out. However, it's shown that most of the reason AJ became such a brat is because Carmela coddles him and refuses to give him any real discipline. When it's suggested the boy be sent to military school, Tony is all for it while Carmela is hesitant.
Criticizes Tony's depressive and moody habits, blaming him for passing those habits onto AJ, but acts basically the same way when she feels unfulfilled or isn't getting what she wants, bundling herself up in the couch in 3x07, "Second Opinion," after having her moral complicity in Tony's lifestyle underscored by Dr. Melfi's referral, and suffering from ill health in 4x13, "Whitecaps," when she is heartbroken once Furio flees America. These events mirror Tony's own bedridden states in 1x12, "Isabella" and 2x13, "Funhouse." She is about as prone to depression as Tony and copes in similar manners, but never admits it.
There's also the basic hypocrisy of adopting the persona of a faithful Catholic housewife when she is fully aware that her husband is a first-hand murderer. "From Where To Eternity" implies this, and "The Knight In White Satin Armor" shows that she knows Tony covers up murders where needed when Tony tells her that Janice killed Richie Aprile, and Tony took care of it. "The Blue Comet" also indicates that she is also fully aware of Tony's ongoing involvement in violence, as she is unfazed about the family needing to go into hiding due to the gang war between New Jersey and the Lupertazzi family, beyond being dismayed that it's something that still needs to happen at their age.
In "Live Free or Die" she argues that "there must have been some reason" when Meadow explains how she met an Afghani family at her law internship who had been persecuted under the Patriot Act. This, coming from a woman who constantly derides the federal government for allegedly persecuting her husband and family purely based on their Italian-American heritage.
She occasionally complains that Tony hasn't matured past his high school jock personality while she herself often acts like a high school Alpha Bitch.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: Talks occasionally about her past chances of a different life outside the Mafia, but she ultimately loves the life of luxury.
Ignorance Is Bliss: She takes this sort of attitude towards Tony's criminal activities, including the fact he's almost certainly killed people, and taken numerous mistresses. As long as she doesn't hear about it or see it, she's able to tolerate it and pretend it doesn't happen, because she enjoys the life of luxury he provides her. Tony, for his part, is perfectly happy not mentioning what he does, on the chance he's ever indicted and she's required to testify against him.
Tony: Carmela, after 18 years of marriage, don't make me make you an accessory after the fact.
Ignored Epiphany: She meets with a psychiatrist who spells out very bluntly and clearly that she's deluding herself by saying that her violent, mobbed up, serially cheating husband with a temper is a "good man", she's actively enabling him by sticking with him and benefiting from his blood money, he'll never become a "good man", and the only good course of action for Carmela is to take the kids and get out of there. She's shaken to the core by his extremely frank and accurate examination of her situation, but by the very next episode, she's backpedaling on his advice and ultimately sticks with Tony due to the life of pampered luxury he provides her.
Inferiority Superiority Complex:
Carmela very much knows that she is entirely dependent on Tony to maintain her glamorous lifestyle, but the patriarchal lifestyle of the Mafia and her lack of self-discipline prevent her from actually making something of herself. She takes these insecurities out on others she believes are below her and is easily stunned into silence when those people turn out to be more independent and successful than her.
A lot of her posturing about the family's material success around civilian characters clearly stems from her insecurities about the fact everything they have is solely because her husband is in fact the violent, stealing criminal the public perceives him as.
In Vino Veritas: Her true feelings about her mother-in-law Livia are revealed to all when she has had a few drinks at Livia's wake.
It's All About Me: While she's not as narcissistic as her husband or Janice, it generally doesn't take much for Carmela to make a situation revolve around her.
Lazy Bum: Apart from her lack of real skills, the other reason why Carmela is unable to make something of herself and branch out from being a mother/housewife is because she's gotten too comfortable having Tony provide for her and having hired help to do work for her and doesn't want to put in the effort.
Male Gaze: "Sentimental Education" treats viewers to a lingering shot of Carmela's nude, shapely rear after she's just had sex with AJ's guidance counselor.
Mama Bear: In the first episode, when she thought someone was breaking into her daughter's window, what does she do? She grabs an AK-47 and marches outside with Tony in tow. It turned out Meadow was sneaking out of the house, but the thought counted. She has a similar reaction when she spots a bear near the house while she's alone with AJ.
Masochism Tango: With Tony. They have a bad relationship, both mistreat each other, Carmela is in serious denial, Tony is a serial cheater (and everything else)... but they find it impossible to break up.
Never My Fault: Granted, Tony is a terrible father. However, Carmela puts all the blame on him for how Meadow and A.J. turned out while ignoring her own role in their upbringing, such as by spoiling them with expensive gifts and food, pulling strings to get them out of trouble or undeserved rewards, and setting a poor example with her Alpha Bitch and Obnoxious Entitled Housewife behavior.
Not So Above It All: She likes to act superior, but is most certainly not above using her mob connections for her own ends.
Obnoxious Entitled Housewife: She has a very smug and condescending attitude when interacting with waitstaff or store employees. She also serves as a dark example of this in that she has no qualms about invoking Tony's reputation or his connections to force people to give her what she wants.
Parental Hypocrisy: In the series, she frequently scolds and punishes Meadow and AJ whenever they engage in underage drinking. Her only scene in The Many Saints of Newark shows her alongside Tony and Artie trying to obtain beer for a Wild Teen Party.
Pet the Dog: She’s got issues, but she’s a genuinely involved mom who communicates with her kids and wants what’s good for them, even if she doesn't always go about it the right way.
She also genuinely loves Tony despite the way he treats her and the resentment that exists between the two for various reasons. She's truly devastated when Junior puts him into a coma and helps nurse him back to health.
In the second episode she's sympathetic when AJ's science teacher has his car stolen and asks Tony to help recover it. Tony decides to pull a You Owe Me on the guy but Carmela was honestly interested in helping him out of genuine empathy.
Pretty in Mink: Tony buys her some furs. One is a sable coat, but he asks they make love with her wearing nothing but the coat.
Properly Paranoid: Her concerns about how she and the kids will be financially supported should Tony be arrested or killed are very much justified. It's shown that Tony blows through most of his earnings as soon as he gets it and has put very little aside for such a scenario. And despite Tony's assurances that his men will also help out should the worst happen, they hold back on giving her any of their money when Tony is in a coma in Season 6 and only do so when it becomes clear Tony will recover and find out.
Screw the Rules, I Have Connections!: Invokes the nefarious power of the Soprano surname from time to time.
Sex for Services: AJ's guidance counselor deduces that this is why she's sleeping with him, as she always mentions how she wishes there was some way for AJ's grades to improve while they're in bed together.
Social Climber: Carmela would like nothing more than for the family to move up in the world and be seen as legitimate members of society rather than a bunch of Nouveau Riche criminals. This makes her an easy mark for people like Dean Ross, who will convince her to give them money under the idea it will make her appear to be a big shot.
Stealing from the Till: Or Stealing From The Duck Feed Bin to be precise. She steals from Tony's cash stash after discovering a fingernail from one of his goomahs, which Carmela uses to send a message to her husband. Tony gets it and lets it slide, initially.
Stepford Smiler: Works hard to maintain an image of domestic bliss and dignity despite her own serious misgivings about her family, domestic life, and the endless stress caused by her husband's lifestyle.
Supreme Chef: All the mob wives are expected to be good home cooks, but the consensus is that Carmela takes the prize. Her lasagna and ziti are known even to the wiseguys in New York.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With several men, most notably Furio.
Wicked Pretentious: Carmela thinks of herself as cultured and partakes in cultural activities like visiting museums or starting a film club. But it's clear that Carmela's understanding of art is extremely limited thanks to living in her mob wife bubble. When Meadow and her Columbia friends discuss the Homoerotic Subtext in Billy Budd at dinner, Carmela is completely out of her depth and the only thoughts she has on Citizen Kane come from the film review by Leonard Maltin she read before watching it.
Women Are Wiser: Carmela is usually little better than Tony with her selfishness and hypocrisy, but when she learns Meadow's coach was sleeping with Meadow's friend, Tony instantly tries to rationalize it and that there was some misunderstanding. Carmela rightly points out that said coach is an adult and there should be absolutely zero room for such "misunderstandings."