All Girls Want Bad Boys: It becomes such a problem, Jennifer ends up seeing her own head doctor to deal with her growing attraction to Tony. Finally, she admits to her problem and is able to strongly refuse Tony's advances by the end of the series.
All Therapists Are Muggles: A non-supernatural version, where "Muggle" means "somebody not involved with The Mafia". Tony initially tells her that he's a waste management consultant. That said, she quickly figures out what Tony's real occupation is.
The Artifact: The therapy scenes are a key part of the show in the first season in particular, but the show gradually moves away from them and it becomes clear that if therapy is helping Tony in any way, it is to sharpen his skills as a criminal. Eventually, the Tony-Melfi scenes mostly become a way of recapping the latest goings-on in the plot. What arguably makes this status more clear is that there are multiple examples from season two onwards of Tony quitting therapy for a span of a few episodes and the show doesn't really fall apart as a result.
Audience Surrogate: Played with. While she doesn't see the exact details of Tony's life, she's been with him since the beginning of the show and listened to some of his most private confessions. Like most viewers, she's sometimes charmed by him and oftentimes disturbed by his lifestyle and mindset. She also slowly stops humoring his callous behavior and is even one of the few characters to cut him out of her life entirely.
Beware the Nice Ones: She's a genuinely nice person for the most part... but don't push her buttons too hard (as Tony realizes pretty quickly).
Bittersweet Ending: Her last appearance sees her ending her sessions with Tony permanently after coming to the conclusion he is never going to be rehabilitated and that she has unknowingly become an accomplice by helping him become more cunning and manipulative rather than being a better person. They part ways on unsurprisingly very bitter terms, but Melfi at least stays true to her principles and maintains her moralty.
Brainy Brunette: Has brown hair and is a very intelligent and educated individual, except for a few episodes where she has an auburn tint in her hair.
Confess in Confidence: Partially, she's only given vague details for pragmatic and potentially legal reasons (partly, this is overcautiousness, but partly — and Dr. Melfi references this — it's because she would have a duty to warn and to notify the authorities if Tony revealed evidence of a future crime).
Critical Psychoanalysis Failure: Gradually gets distraught by her therapy sessions with Tony, leading to weight gains, drinking, and needing therapy herself.
Day in the Limelight: "Employee of the Month".
Deadpan Snarker: Despite how soft-spoken and shy she usually is, she can actually be pretty sarcastic at times. Especially when she's angry with Tony. She develops this to a great extent during the therapy session which ends in her dumping Tony as a patient.
Descent into Addiction: Specifically, borderline alcoholism, as the toll of treating Tony leads her to greater drinking. She kicks her drinking habit after going to therapy herself.
Drinking on Duty: Seen taking a shot of vodka before Tony's appointment in "House Arrest." She ends up realizing she has a problem and goes to therapy.
Drowning My Sorrows: She's a borderline alcoholic. She does eventually quit after going to therapy herself, though it takes a while.
Emotionless Girl: It's important to her job that she remains calm during therapy sessions and most of the time she does just that.
The Fettered: Has the chance to unleash Tony against her rapist, but decides not to.
Florence Nightingale Effect: Present and discussed.
Foil: To Carmela. They’re both women who arguably understand Tony in ways no one else does, but their differences are night and day with Carmela enabling Tony’s criminal activities and even coming to negotiations for their marriage to work, while Melfi stays true to her principles and rejects all of Tony’s advances and lifestyle.
Know When to Fold Them: In the final season, she realizes how futile her attempts to rehabilitate Tony have been and ends their sessions once and for all.
Leg Focus: Her legs are one of her defining physical characteristics, which Tony notices early on.
My God, What Have I Done?: After she reads the psychiatric study The Criminal Personality, which argues that therapy is at best ineffective on sociopaths and at worst can actually make them more successful criminals. Convinced by its findings, Melfi realizes she's effectively become another one of Tony's accomplices and, to her credit, ends their sessions thereafter.
Not So Similar: On meeting her for the first time, Tony is pleased to learn that her father's family came from Campania, the same region in southern Italy his family is from. In general, he assumes their shared heritage means she'll have an easier time understanding his mindset and motivations, which makes him more impatient when she doesn't. What Tony doesn't understand is that he's primarily a product of mob culture rather than just Italian-American culture.
Only Sane Woman: Tends to be as objective as possible about whatever issues Tony is facing and can gently call him out or offer insight as needed. She is also the most morally upright character in the entire series, as she avoids at all costs getting involved in Tony's actions.
Out of Focus: She delivers the first line in the series and is arguably the second most important character in Season 1 besides Tony himself. Her importance gradually decreases as the series goes on, though she makes regular appearances until the end.
Put on a Bus: There are several occasions in which Tony, in one way or another, ceases his therapy sessions with her. These tend to be at or near the end of seasons, thus the audience doesn't really notice.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: After Tony tries to pursue a personal relationship, she's driven to land some truths on him, who takes it as expected.
Melfi: ... you're not a truthful person. You're not respectful of women, You're not really respectful of people. Maybe you love them, I don't know. You take what you want from them by force or the threat of force. I couldn't live like that. I couldn't bear witness to violence...
The Shrink: She serves as Tony's, and his seeking her help was the initial premise of the show. She actually is a very skilled therapist and is able to help him through some of his issues. She could best be described as combining both sides of the Awesome variety, calling Tony out while also showing him compassion for how dysfunctional his upbringing was. However, later episodes indicate that he may well be a sociopath and beyond actual rehabilitation, and the biggest effect of therapy for Tony has been helping him seem normal (as normal as a mob boss can be).
Stating the Simple Solution: When Tony comes to her for advice, she often gives him the most practical advice that she can, though Tony is very selective on if he follows her advice or not. A good example of this is when Tony relates his feelings of guilt about not being at the hijacking the night that his cousin Tony B was arrested and fears that Tony B may hold a grudge over it. Melfi merely asks if he's tried to talk to him about his feelings.
Therapist in Therapy: She is regularly seen in her own therapy sessions with Dr Kupferberg. In fact, after the first season or two, these are pretty much the only times she is seen outside of her own office.
Token Good Teammate: Of the show's main cast. Melfi has her flaws, but she also has one of the strongest moral compasses in the show and is able to resist the temptation of more directly benefitting from her connection to Tony.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With Tony as she’s the only character who knows him better than anyone else, but their clinical relationship, as well as Tony being in the mafia and his traditional family values, keep them apart.
The Watson: Has this role in the series; Tony summarizes and bluntly explains almost of all the major plotlines to Melfi.
What You Are in the Dark: Jennifer has a moment like this when she discovers the identity of the man who raped her. She considers telling Tony, knowing he would give the culprit a long and painful death, but eventually decides against it.