Abusive Parents:
Much like Tony, she was the victim of this in the form of her spiteful mother, Livia, who relentlessly criticized her appearance as well as her failed string of romantic relationships.
She later becomes a pretty bad parent to Bobby Baccala’s kids, as they see through her charades easily, and after his death, the kids are stuck with her alone.
All Girls Want Bad Boys:
While in high school, she dated the brutal Richie Aprile, whom she is later revealed to remain attracted to despite the abusive nature of their prior relationship. While they briefly resume their relationship in Season 2, she kills him in reply to new abuse.
In Season 4, she replaces Richie with the violently unstable Ralph Cifaretto.
A psychiatrist makes her realize the Electra complex pattern she's locked into and guides her to break it, so she begins to look for the reverse. She quickly dumps Ralphie on some lame pretext and starts to pursue Bobby Baccalieri, a Gentle Giant who is the exact opposite of her previous type.
All Take and No Give: Janice is always requesting and getting favors from others, yet is unable to reciprocate in the slightest, let alone act with altruism.
Aloof Big Sister: Played with but subverted. In Season 1, Tony speaks of her this way to Dr. Melfi when describing how she left him and his younger sister to endure the brunt of their tyrannical mother's abuse in order to pursue a hedonistic lifestyle. Similarly, Tony all but admits in the same therapy session that he was perpetually anxious of the possibility that she was his father's favorite child. In Season 2, she returns to New Jersey and quickly reopens old wounds by ingratiating herself with their mother, Livia, in order to become the prime beneficiary of the estate. However, it is later revealed that she is just as much a victim of Livia's abusive parenting as her younger brother.
Berserk Button: Do not bring up her estranged son Harpo. Tony forces her to meltdown and attack him with a fork by using his name, simply because he can't bear seeing her happy.
Big Beautiful Woman: Shitty personality aside, Janice is quite the vivacious, curvaceous woman and has attracted the attention of many men throughout the series.
Bullying the Disabled: Stole Svetlana's prosthetic leg when she wouldn't let her have Livia's music records. She ends up making enemies with the Russian mafia, who beat her into giving the leg back.
Calling the Old Man Out: Constantly pestering and bickering with her brother, the head of the family.
Cartwright Curse: Similar to the Aprile crew capos and the ostensible Aprile Curse, all the men who have been romantically involved with Janice on the show have met horrible demises, one of which she was directly responsible for. Janice shoots Richie after he punches her, Ralphie gets beaten to death by Tony, and Bobby is gunned down by Phil Leotardo's hitmen during his "decapitation" of New Jersey. Although Richie's and Ralphie's demise could be connected to the Aprile Curse, both of their brief flings with Janice suggest the existence of a "Janice Soprano" curse as well.
Catchphrase: "There's a lot I could say right now that I am not gonna say."
Character Development: While Janice still remains a self-centered Jerkass throughout the series, her relationship with Bobby does help her mellow out. In fact, it's his grief over the loss of his first wife, Karen, that moves her to pursue him (even if she still has to use underhanded methods to gain his affection). Unfortunately, it's also clear that she's still taking after her mother, Livia, which comes full-circle once Bobby is murdered.
Consummate Liar: When she has something to gain, she is second to none in feigning sentimentality and manipulating those around her with gossip and half-truths.
Cool Aunt: Her seemingly laid-back and free-spirited personality along with her liberal outlook charms even Meadow, who is largely distrustful and contemptuous towards adult figures in her family. This is subverted when she reveals her narcissistic and vindictive nature by angrily calling upon Meadow and her friends to be punished for wrecking Livia's house, where she plans on living.
Dark and Troubled Past: Arguably one of the (few) factors that prevents her from being a Hate Sink is that she had a truly horrid upbringing at the hands of Livia, who constantly found ways to put her down. After leaving home, she'd have a marriage that ended in divorce, the son she had later ending up homeless while in her husband's custody and her never being able to see him again.
Didn't Think This Through: She didn't do her late mother any justice by conducting a remembrance in the great room of Tony's house. Just ask Carmela.
Dreadful Musician: Employee of the Month sees her horribly butchering the main riff of (I Can't Get No) Satisfaction. To add insult to injury, the guitar riff is a very easy one for beginners to play.
Faith–Heel Turn: Has a short-lived and shallow Christian rebirth. Her narcissism flourishes again in no time.
Fatal Flaw: Much like her brother, her quick temper often gets her into more trouble than it's worth, causing Tony to have to come and clean her messes.
Feminine Women Can Cook: Junior knows better and tells Bobby that everybody stays away from her food, but she deceives Bobby at first with it, pretending to be like the other mob wives while presenting Carmela's food as her own. She half-tries later to somewhat evolve, but only manages to serve prepared food and bad meals, showing she is too lazy and neglectful to serve others, and too uncaring to be bothered or even realize it.
Foil: For Tony, despite having many of the same traits. Janice shows that not being in the criminal lifestyle doesn't automatically void her of being just as scummy as her criminal brother.
Freudian Excuse: Same as Tony's, less than stellar parents and upbringing.
Granola Girl: At first. It fades as she gets settled into Jersey.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Just like Tony, she tends to explode in violent outbursts. She even kills Richie in a fit of rage after he hit her.
Hidden Depths:
She's one of the few characters on the show to be openly tolerant of homosexuality, having lost a close friend to the AIDS crisis during her time in Seattle.
She's outraged over Richie's homophobia toward his own son, even asking "what difference would it make" if he was gay.
She's genuinely moved by Bobby's anguish over the death of his wife, which sparks her relationship with him.
Horrible Judge of Character: At one point during an argument with Carmela, she tells her that Richie's stay in prison has made him more sympathetic towards the plight of women. Carmela scoffs at her.
Hypocrite: For all her New Age talk, she's as much an Heteronormative Crusader as Carmela or Tony.
It's All About Me: Big time. Nearly every decision she makes in the series is based on whatever will benefit her personally. Her decision to disregard her late mother's wishes for no big funeral or wake rests solely on the fact she doesn't want others to perceive her as cheap, not because she actually cared about Livia (Tony had to pay for her plane ticket in full and threaten to leave her out of Livia's estate to get her to even come to the funeral).
I Was Quite a Looker: She's still quite attractive as an adult, but in high school, she was lusted after by many of the boys Tony knew growing up, much to his chagrin.
Jerkass: She's an incredibly obnoxious, narcissistic woman with a Hair-Trigger Temper.
Jerkass Has a Point: In Season 2 when she notes Carmela's untapped potential and dependency on Tony, then in Season 4 when she tells Bobby his prolonged grief over his wife is unhealthy.
Kick the Dog: Stealing Svetlana's prosthetic leg may very well be her lowest point.
Lady Macbeth: She was manipulative towards Richie, telling him he deserved more than he received. When having sex, she made suggestions of him taking over as boss and goaded him into the power play he organized against Tony. She also manipulated Bobby by scaring his children after their mother's death, knowing that he would call her after being unable to cope with their fear and confusion.
Lazy Bum: Spends most of her time watching TV or otherwise sitting around, claiming some certified disability or another, and is quick to remonstrate with others when they request any form of minor help from her, claiming that she is very busy or unavailable.
Like Mother, Like Daughter: Janice serves as a sort of stand-in for Livia at times as she's just as toxic, narcissistic, and manipulative, and towards the end of the series begins to indulge in the kind of tearful hysterics that Livia pulled for attention. Lampshaded by Tony in "All Happy Families" when he notes that Janice has taken on many of their mother's traits and has started to excuse Livia's behavior and abuse.
The Load: Has a parasitic lifestyle that only generates problems for the actual money earners.
Loss of Identity: During her hippie days on the West Coast, she ditches the name of 'Janice' and adopts the name 'Parvati'. She reverts back to 'Janice' when she is back in New Jersey.
Mama Bear: Is genuinely upset when her stepdaughter Sophia appears to be taken advantage of during her volleyball game, and though she definitely overreacts (physically attacking the mother of the offending player), the concern is there. Janice even lampshades this trope when she later tries to explain her over-the-top actions to Sophia.
Manipulative Bitch:
She frequently encouraged Richie to defy Tony, because she wanted to be married to the boss. One night while having sex, which ended abruptly when Janice said "Oh baby, you're the boss... it should be you." Richie became upset and told Janice he needed to be loyal. Janice's response—"Tell that to Paul Castellano."—is a reference to the real-life slaying of the Gambino boss by John Gotti.
Frustrated with Bobby's refusal to commit, she sent Bobby's children instant messages via her Mac, choosing a user name that appeared satanic, and indicated to them that she was watching them by referring to things in their room (which she was able to see from her window) and succeeded in scaring them badly. She subsequently rushed over to help comfort the distressed Baccalieri children and curry favor with their bewildered father.
Morality Pet: Despite her egocentric personality, she does care for others.
She's genuinely upset over not being able to see her son, Harpo, to the point that Tony mocking her over it is enough to provoke a violent reaction out of her.
She does genuinely love Bobby and her stepchildren, as well as their daughter, Domenica. Despite the tensions between her and Bobby's children, it's clear that she does try to gain their affection, which unfortunately goes to hell once Bobby is killed.
Narcissist: An "amorous" example given that she also exhibits traits of histrionic personality disorder (See Theodore Millon's "Personality Subtypes") as evidenced by how she actively seeks to make herself the center of attention regardless of the circumstances while making such events as dramatic (i.e: theatrical) as possible, much to the chagrin of Tony and Carmela. However, unlike Tony, Janice also exhibits traits typically seen in "unprincipled" narcissists, given that she pursues a highly parasitic lifestyle with hardly any shame whatsoever and seems almost completely incapable of forming any genuine attachments to those around her.
Never My Fault: She's always finding reasons to shift blame away from herself, and never takes accountability for her many flaws.
Obfuscating Disability: Diagnosed with a condition that grants her social benefits, it's hinted and discussed that it's a fabricated phony excuse.
Out of Focus: Downplayed. During season three, she mostly appears in amusing side plots as a form of comic relief, which stand in contrast to her relationships with Richie and Bobby (both of which have profound consequences for various other characters in the show).
Parental Favoritism: She has envy of Tony for the attention her mother Livia gave to him. In turn, Tony thinks Janice was Daddy's Girl.
Pet the Dog: Openly calls out Richie's homophobia towards his son, saying that him being gay should make no difference.
She's also shown to be deeply touched by the love and devotion Bobby shows to his deceased wife, an observation that helps her to realize that her relationship with the incredibly flawed Ralphie is not something worth pursuing.
Despite their often contentious relationship (up to and including her toying with the idea of having Richie kill Tony), Janice still always comes back around to love her brother: she contemplates writing a song for him after he deals with the Russian mobsters who beat her up, she frequents his bedside while he's in the hospital, and she tearfully thanks him profusely after Tony secures the Sacrimonis' house for her and Bobby following John's allocution.
Janice is usually snarky at best and flat out mean at worst to Bobby's kids, but when she feels Sophia is being taken advantage of during her volleyball game she aggressively sticks up for her, even getting into a fight on her behalf (not that this is presented as a particularly smart or mature move, but still). And while she definitely plays up her injuries on the teacup ride at the St Elzear fair for sympathy and hopefully money, she appears completely serious in her concern for her kids on the ride.
Put on a Bus: Literally at the end of season 2, but Tony's solace is short-lived as she comes back for good the next season.
Really Gets Around: In her youth, she was notorious for her rampant promiscuity. Upon returning to New Jersey, she continues her promiscuous ways to a slightly lesser extent as a Gold Digger who hops from one rising mobster to another.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Given a pretty severe one by Tony in "Where's Johnny?", where he calls her out on leaving him to take Livia's abuse.
Spanner in the Works: She completely derails Richie's plans to oppose Tony by killing him. She did her brother a massive favor and she didn't even plan on it.
Took a Level in Kindness: Apparently after she hooks up with Bobby, although Tony sees right through it.
Tragic Villain: Downplayed. As much of a Jerkass as Janice is, her upbringing was no picnic. Her mother was an emotionally abusive hag and her father a mobster who was more than happy to drag his kids into the family business, leading her to run away from home and go through a number of unstable relationships, including one that cost her her son. Even when she does manage to settle down, she's unable to outrun the toxic tendencies of her mother and ends up losing her beloved husband in a Mob War. Her later characterization, especially in the finale, is especially played tragically, as she loses one of the few people who could give her some semblance of a normal life and is ultimately doomed to become like the very mother who set her on this path while being completely oblivious.
Tranquil Fury: After being punched in the face by Richie, Janice leaves and returns with a gun. She barely emotes as she shoots a disbelieving Richie dead.
The Un-Favorite: Livia kept many of Tony's childhood artifacts and some of Barbara's but nothing from Janice.
Unseen No More: Janice is only mentioned in dialogues and shown via childhood flashbacks during Season 1. She becomes a series regular in Season 2.
Wicked Stepmother: After she marries Bobby. Bobby's kids hate her for the obvious reasons, and even more so after Bobby is murdered, leaving Janice their sole caretaker. Janice is of course so narcissistic she's clueless to how much Bobby's kids despise her and thinks she's doing a great job.
Wife-Basher Basher: She shoots Richie Aprile to death after he punches her.
You Are What You Hate: She effectively becomes Livia by the end of the series once she becomes the sole caretaker of Bobby's children.