Accidental Murder: He killed Robin by running fast enough to obliterate her into bloody splatter by just colliding with her. This occurred when he was on a power high via Compound V, causing him to lose control of his speed by the time he collided with Robin. He initially brushes off the incident with a dismissive laugh before later events start to weigh down on him and he starts to feel genuinely regretful of killing her to the point of offering a actual apology towards Robin's boyfriend, Hughie.
In the comics, A-Train participates in Starlight's sexual assault, openly mocks her in front of the entire Seven at Starlight's first meeting and tries to do it a second time before Starlight stops him. In the show, The Deep was the only one who did the deed and A-Train had no involvement in it.
In the comics, A-Train is almost exclusively shown to be a wimpy jackass and is somehow an even bigger douchebag than Homelander in that he can't even pretend to be nice, even in comparison to most other Supes. While still a cowardly bully in the show, A-Train is humanized considerably, showing him to have a soft spot for his family, has legitimate relationships, and has some nuance in his thoughts about the wrongs he's done as a member of the Seven.
In the comics, A-Train is killed by Hughie, but in the show the two of them actually make amends in the fourth season after A-Train helps Hughie save his father's life as redemption for accidentally killing Robin. In fact, the third and fourth seasons push A-Train towards a full-blown redemption arc, a far cry from his comic counterpart, who remained a sniveling coward until the very end.
Addled Addict: He started using Compound V as a performance enhancer, but became addicted to it. This lead to him making terrible choices to fuel his dependency.
Affably Evil: In later seasons as A-Train starts to realize the weight of his actions and develop remorse and regret, it also leads to him becoming more considerate and polite towards others. He genuinely tries to make an effort in helping black people, offers a genuine apology to Hughie, and is an openly chill and lax dude around his brother and nephews, even if said brother becomes estranged from him. While not above snarking and making insults, A-Train's affability becomes more real, coinciding with him becoming as close to an actual hero in Season 4.
A Fool and His New Money Are Soon Parted: Furthering the parallels between A-Train and professional athletes, A-Train is shown to have made terrible financial decisions with the money he was making while a member of The Seven, and ends up going deep into debt as soon as his income stream dries up. A deleted scene reveals that even though A-Train was making forty million dollars a year (before taxes), he only has about a quarter million dollars in his bank account because he spent it on (among other things): thirteen houses, a private jet (which he can outrun), an private island that he's never even visited, and having Jan Michael Vincent's ashes shot into space.
All for Nothing:
After everything he sacrificed in the first season to hide his Compound V addiction and ensure he kept his spot on The Seven, Homelander ultimately replaces him anyway because the abuse has left him on the constant verge of another heart attack. Some of Ashley's throwaway dialogue also heavily implies that the speedster heroes that Vought employs regularly burn out from the physical strain too, meaning all that A-Train did was delay the inevitable.
Season 3 has A-Train trying to make amends to his brother after their falling out in Season 1 by attempting to call out Blue Hawk, a police-themed Supe who killed an innocent black man and lied about the circumstances of the death on the news. He tries to bring this up in a Seven meeting only to get sidelined by The Deep, who Homelander sides with for the sake of spiting A-Train for the latter's disability and lack of use to him. Despite this awful treatment, he remains loyal to Homelander and rats out Starlight and Supersonic's attempted betrayal to secure his safety. For his commitment, Vought doesn't give A-Train any notice that they are bringing Blue Hawk over for a talk where he makes excuses for his actions and hastily have him set up a public apology at a neighborhood community center, which ends not just with Blue Hawk horribly trying to further justify his actions to them, but also attacking the crowd, injuring and possibly killing several, and crippling A-Train's brother in the process. Worse still, Blue Hawk gets away with it by blaming the entire incident on the crowd and labeling them as ANTIFA members. Shortly afterwards, A-Train takes advantage of the chaos caused by Soldier Boy attacking Herogasm to kill Blue Hawk, which provides a moment of personal satisfaction for getting revenge; Vought simply blames Blue Hawk's death on Soldier Boy and any chance for public or legal reckoning for Blue Hawk's victims is lost. After A-Train's brother learns about this, he cuts A-Train out of his life.
Arch-Enemy: To Hughie. At first, Hughie is an Unknown Rival to A-Train, due to A-Train's carefree attitude toward Robin's death. However, after A-Train is forced to kill Popclaw, he blames Hughie for it and makes it his priority to hunt Hughie down.
Armor-Piercing Question: He's on the receiving end of two.
He receives one from Hughie. "What's better? The rush, or knowing that as long as you take it you're the fastest?". A-Train takes a few moments to respond before agreeing to Hughie's demands.
In "The Last Time To Look On This World Of Lies", Starlight calls him out for betraying Supersonic and demands to know why he's so desperate to gain the approval of Homelander who evidently could not care less about him and does not respect him. A-Train has no answer.
In "The Insider," A-Train is the one to put one of these to Mother's Milk when the latter is preparing to flee with his family to Belize.
A-Train: You think Homelander and Vought and all of this shit ain't coming to Belize? This whole fucking world? Where's your family gonna go then?
The Atoner: In Season 4 Hughie offers him one chance for A-Train to atone for what he did to him by stealing Compound V for Hughie's father. While initially neither think that'll settle their grudge as Hughie can just tell him to go to hell after he got what he wants Hughie decides to bury the hatchet, allowing A-Train to successfully make amends with at least one person he wronged.
Becoming the Mask: MM theorizes that he spent so much time pretending to care about the plight of black people in Season 3 that something actually stuck, and he grew a conscience. This theory ultimately proved true by the end of Season 4, wherein he turned against The Seven and began assisting The Boys, before going into hiding with his family. By Season 5, he's officially joined their ranks, although it doesn't last long due to his murder at Homelander's hands.
Being Evil Sucks: It becomes increasingly clear throughout the series that this is how he really feels about doing dirty work for Vought and Homelander, as while they shower him with money, fame, and adoration it becomes clear that he feels increasingly empty, guilt-ridden, and worst of all, alone. He's forced to kill his girlfriend Popclaw to prevent Homelander from killing them both in a far more brutal manner, he alienates his brother and family with his ego and impulsiveness, and he sold out Supersonic and got him killed by Homelander in the process after Supersonic offered him support and hope that they can beat him. By Season 4, he's suffering a moral crisis that leaves him reluctant to perform more villainous acts and finally decides to be a hero for real after seeing a kid smile at him with genuine pride as he was carrying MM to the hospital, which makes him proud of himself for once.
Beyond Redemption: While Nathan has always tried his best to support his younger brother, he finds it grating that he doesn't do anything with his gifts except carry out endorsement deals and live it up as a premier superhero. When A-Train takes Vought's offer to cover up his killing of Blue Hawk and depict the violent supe as a martyr, Nathan finally decides that helping A-Train is a waste of time and cuts him out of his life.
Big Damn Heroes: In Season 4, he saves Hughie's life from Homelander out of real altruism, and knowing that if Homelander would have noticed him, he would have been dead for good. In episode 6 of season 4, he also saves MM after the latter has a severe panic attack by taking him to a hospital.
Big Eater: A-Train maintains a 30,000 calorie a day diet to power his super speed. Once his Compound V abuse makes using said speed potentially lethal, this diet starts to put pounds on A-Train, much to the Homelander's consternation.
Blue Is Heroic: Invoked with his costume, which is primarily blue, and is a contrast to his rival Shockwave, who has an orange costume. He starts to live up to the expectations in season 4.
Bookends: A-Train is introduced into the series killing Robin by running through her when she steps into the street. In the opening episode of the final season, A-Train once again sees a young woman stepping into his path as he's running. This time, he's being chased by Homelander and truly running for his life, but chooses to swerve and crash to avoid killing another innocent woman. She survives unaware of what just happened, while A-Train is caught by Homelander and dies heroically.
Break the Haughty: Initially considered to be the fastest in the world, A-Train suffers a series of misfortunes brought about by his own actions that results his ego getting knocked down several pegs. He's forced to kill his girlfriend, gets humiliated by Hughie and Kimiko blindsiding him, has a near-fatal heart attack from his Compound V abuse, gets blackmailed by Starlight over his killing of Popclaw, and then gets kicked out of the Seven once his ability to perform is compromised by the lingering effects of said heart attack.
Break Them by Talking: He does this as he's being killed by Homelander, deriding him as weak and pathetic and laughing at his face till Homelander snaps his neck. His words do leave a mark on Homelander as shown in the next episode when he's mourning his death.
Broken Pedestal: Hughie was a big fan of A-Train, so much so that Hughie had several action figures of him (even rare limited edition ones). However, after A-Train accidentally killed his girlfriend Robin, Hughie is angered by the mere sight of him.
Brought Down to Normal: When Kimiko breaks his leg, A-Train becomes just a regular guy with a disability. He also finds himself on the receiving end of much more disrespect than before, from Homelander's constant dismissal of him to a racist security guard Profiling him.
Brought to You by the Letter "S": Associated with the letter A. He has an "A" for a belt buckle, one on his shades, and is shaved into part of his haircut.
But for Me, It Was Tuesday: Deconstructed. A-Train running through Robin is the decisive event that begins the show's storyline and is the source of A-Train's problems in life going From Bad to Worse. Given how utterly dismissive and forgetful he is of Robin's death, the show makes it clear that this isn't the first time this kind of incident occurred for him, with A-Train practically forgetting that it even happened in a short time. Unfortunately for him, this isn't something the victim's boyfriend forgot at all, which leads to a lot of trouble for A-Train and the Seven as a whole in the long run. And if he hadn't filed it under "Tuesday" and forgotten about it, he could have begun derailing The Boys' plans much earlier. That said, it's suggested that his abuse of Compound V has scrambled his mental faculties, impairing his ability to connect the dots until it was too late.
Karmic Butt-Monkey: A-Train rarely gets to enjoy being at the top of his game within the Seven, as luck has a tendency to screw him over, although a large part of his misfortunes are brought upon by himself. To recap, his position as the Seven's speedster is gradually destroyed in season 1 through a series of events: making an enemy of Hughie Campbell (and by extension, the Boys), being blackmailed by way of his addiction to Compund V into killing his long-time girlfriend Popclaw, getting a heart attack in the middle of a rampage against Hughie and receiving the boot from the team, replaced with the much younger Shockwave as he's reduced to a scraping C-lister for Vought. Things don't get better for him as the series goes along, as he endures mockery for his aging abilities, becomes the face of white savior films about his backstory and gradually sees himself appealing more to fake activism to keep himself relevant, only to falter in the face of super-fueled police brutality caused by sponsored Blue Hawk when it conflicts with his larger interests, resulting in his brother Nathan being crippled. When he finally decides to do something about the issue by killing Blue Hawk, his actions lead to the supe martirized in the eyes of the public as his victims receive no justice, causing his family to cut him off. This is to say nothing about his constant role in the Seven of being one of Homelander's favorite punching bags.
Cain and Abel: With his brother Nathan. The two used to be close, but Nathan became more disappointed with A-Train as time went on and the supe life corrupted A-Train. After A-Train killing Blue Hawk for crippling Nathan, Nathan wants nothing to do with him and refuses to let his kids talk to their uncle.
Captain Ethnic: The show deconstructs this trope through him. At the beginning of Season 3, A-Train is attempting to rebrand himself as a hero who stands for the Black community by returning to his African roots as a way to earn brownie points with the public in the same way that Starlight's efforts to diversify The Seven are being met positively. However, several characters see this for the cynical and soulless ploy it truly is. A-Train's own brother even calls him out on it, stating that people who actually know A-Train are aware that he doesn't actually care for the Black community, and that if he actually wanted to make a difference, he'd do something to try and effect positive change.
Category Traitor: In Season 3, A-Train finds himself conflicted about his ties to Vought and to his community and pushed in to reparations after Blue Hawk executes an innocent black man for walking behind a frightened white woman. A-Train does try to help but Vought either ignores him or doesn't understand the true weight of the situation as they make him perform in a soda advert and arrange a disastrous meeting between Blue Hawk and the community. His brother believes A-Train should be on their side and believes he should do more with his powers than appease the masses. After waking up in a hospital bed after giving himself a heart attack by exceeding his powers to kill Blue Hawk for crippling his brother, Ashley offers him the chance to keep his money, be absolved for killing Blue Hawk, and A-Train's reputation will be restored in exchange for going along with a fake story that turns Blue Hawk into a martyr. However, by doing so, Blue Hawk's crimes will be dismissed and his victims will be denied justice. After agreeing to the offer, Nate disowns him for denying him the chance to receive justice and denying his children the chance to see Blue Hawk behind bars.
Homelander is implied to see him as one for killing Blue Hawk, asking "how could you kill one of your own kind in cold blood".
Character Development: A-Train starts off as an arrogant douchebag and a cowardly bully who tries to dodge responsibility, but as the series progresses, he gets humbled and humiliated enough times and eventually starts to realize the weight of his past actions. This causes A-Train to develop a conscience, regret his past actions, and make an attempt at helping others for real. This eventually coincides with him becoming nicer to others and be on his way to becoming an actual hero.
Church of Happyology: He joins the Church of the Collective at The Deep's invitation, and begins following them when Alastair offers to keep his spot in The Seven. His time with them is rather short, and he doesn't buy into any of their teachings.
Cool Shades: A-Train's costume includes stylish blue protective glasses that have a letter "A" on them.
Corrupted Character Copy: He's The Flash if he was reckless with his speed and a Glory Hound who only sought fame.
The Dark Side Will Make You Forget: A-Train partnered up with Vought and become a member of The Seven to help his family escape from poverty. However, the celebrity lifestyle proved too intoxicating for him, and he became so greedy and narcissistic in the process that he forgot why he wanted to be a hero in the first place.
Death by Irony: A-Train ultimately dies because he took the time to avoid doing the very thing that set off the events of the show. Starting the show, he failed to avoid Robin when going at super-speed, resulting in him crashing through her and killing her. At the end, he dodges a pedestrian at high speed, which causes him to stumble and be caught by Homelander, who kills him.
Decomposite Character: His comic counterpart's sleazy and childish traits are given to The Deep instead of him.
Defector from Decadence: Marvin suspects that A-Train is next in line to break away from the Seven. Between having to shoot a Dawn of the Seven follow-up that's loaded with racial stereotyping, being forced to kill Homelander's own fans to frame some innocent (and black) men and struggling to reconnect with his brother, A-Train is certainly accumulating plenty of reasons to walk away.
Defiant to the End: When at Homelander's mercy in the Season 5 premiere, instead of cowing in fear knowing his end is nigh, A-Train mocks Homelander for his need for affection and how he'd be nothing without his powers. It gets him killed, but he died standing up to the man who'd tormented him for years.
Dented Iron:
His abuse of Compound V catches up to him over Season 1.
As of Season 2, it seems going into action so soon after a heart attack may not have been the best idea, and it costs him his spot on the team.
He's still not fully recovered in Season 3, as several characters remark that he's not running as much as he used to and he even had to postpone a public race against another speedster because his powers are still failing him. Hughie is even able to land a punch on him and A-Train is genuinely surprised as his reflexes and perception would normally allow him to easily dodge it.
Devoted to You: Despite his Vought-managed public persona as a swinging single, A-Train is going steady with Popclaw and there's no sign that he's cheating on her, despite what she thinks. He even turns down offers for hook-ups from attractive women after her death. This shows how he prefers to wallow in guilt and thoughts of revenge rather than get on with his life, in contrast to Hughie moving forward with Starlight.
Die Laughing: In the Season 5 premiere, he starts laughing in Homelander's face just before he snaps his neck.
Dies Differently in the Adaptation: Stomped to death by Hughie in the comics, killed by Homelander via Neck Snap here.
Dirty Coward: A-Train is at heart a glorified bully who talks a big game when picking on those of lesser power and status, but folds faster than when he got his leg broken, whenever his wallet or reputation is at stake. He's NOT this when he actually bites the dust, as he faces his death with remarkable composure as he mocks Homelander to his face.
Does This Remind You of Anything?: As Gen V drives parallels between the superhero industry and professional sports, A-Train's story bears resemblance to that of many top athletes struggling to keep up with the hype created through their stellar youth career and high draft position.
Being selected as the first overall pick by the Seven after being the star student of Godolkin University, expectations for the former Teenage Kix breakout were high from the start, but both his own inability to cope with the pressure and the competition from other pro Supes with more spectacular powers and star quality slowly drive him into a spiral of substance abuse, health struggles and misguided spiritual soul-seaching.
His power and the way Vought briefly disposes of him because of his health problems also creates associations with to the way the NFL treats the running back position. The elevated injury risk of their position and the way contracts work in the NFL has encouraged teams to not pay players according to the value they add to the team and instead ditch them for a younger replacement once their cheap rookie contract ends.
His financial status after being let go by Vought closely mirrors many professional athletes. A-Train falls deep into debt almost instantly after his income stream dries up due to the terrible specing decisions he made while he was a member of The Seven. A deleted scene would have revealed that A-Train only had about a quarter million dollars in his bank account even though he was being paid forty million dollars a year (before taxes) during his time with Vought. Some of his more riduculous purchases include: thirteen houses, a private jet (which he's faster than), a private island he's never even visited, and paying to have Jan Michael Vincent's ashes shot into space.
Drug Based Characterization: A-Train takes Compound V as a performance enhancer because, as the top speedster of The Seven, he must defend his title despite the effects it's having on his body.
Dying Moment of Awesome: It takes some balls to call Homelander a pathetic loser to his face, but A-Train spent his last moments doing exactly that, as well as laughing to his face.
Elite Athlete's Aging Angst: The show is set in a world where superheroes are treated like a combination of high-profile actors and athletes in addition to doing heroism. At the start of the series A-Train has been the fastest Supe in the world for several years, allotting him a comfortable position on the Seven and a lot of wealth. However he's growing older and he's not as fast as he used to be. Terrified of the prospect of being replaced by younger up and comers, A-Train has secretly been taking Compound V to boost his speed. Unfortunately he ends up addicted to it, causing him massive health problems and also causing him to fatally run over Hughie's girlfriend Robin, kicking off the events of the series. By the end of the season, his addiction has wrecked his heart and left his bones brittle, causing him to get kicked off the Seven.
Enemy Mine:
A-Train decides to help Hughie and Annie in exposing Stormfront for being a Nazi. He does this mainly because Stormfront being in the Seven blocks him from returning, rather than any genuinely good intentions.
Subverted in Season 3, where after Supersonic tries to involve him in a plan that would take Homelander down a notch, having witnessed A-Train's frequent mistreatment by the latter, A-Train pretends to be on board but then immediately rats Supersonic out to Homelander to bolster his standing.
Even Evil Can Be Loved: A-Train might be a self-interested jackass who thinks nothing of extra-judicial murder, but he's still Nathan's brother, and Nathan loves him dearly.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: He has nephews and an older brother named Nathan who coaches and supports him. After finding out A-Train is still using Compound V, he abandons him for ignoring his advice. A-Train also genuinely loved Popclaw but was forced by Homelander to kill her, he still refused to take responsibility for this and blamed Hughie for it.
Even Evil Has Standards:
While he kills Popclaw for betraying his trust by jamming heroin needles into her arms, it's made clear that he takes no pleasure in doing so. He's visibly shaking as he watches her die, and hangs his head in shame when she finally expires.
Alongside Maeve, he visibly can see flinching when it looks like Homelander is about to laser Starlight in the Seven’s meeting.
Like many others, he hates Stormfront for being a Nazi.
He's visibly shocked at the courtroom massacre where numerous people heads randomly blow up.
He's also visibly surprised when The Deep immediately throws Eagle the Archer under the bus after having described him so positively.
In Season 3, once Nathan draws his attention to Blue Hawk's continued profiling and killing of black men, A-Train seems appropriately disgusted by it, even though he at first refuses to do anything about it due to a fear that getting into political topics will be bad for his image as a carefree speedster.
In the Season 3 finale, he shoots a disturbed look at Black Noir's helmet, which Homelander just brought in as a murder trophy/threat, after Homelander hypocritically castigates him for going against "his own kind" by killing Blue Hawk.
He and The Deep are genuinely horrified seeing Ashley’s loss of hair due to her stress.
He gives a look of disgust to the Deep after learning the latter fucked an octopus. After betraying him and The Seven and revealing it, he takes a second to tell him that he always disliked him which proves that even at his worst, A-Train was disgusted by The Deep.
In Season 4, when Homelander orders him, the Deep, and Black Noir to kill three of his biggest supporters (which includes Todd) with baseball bats, the Deep and Noir do it without hesitation while A-Train looks disturbed by it. When Todd tries to escape, A-Train blocks his path, but he ends up not killing Todd and he lowers his bat, but Noir ends up finishing Todd for him. After the deed is done, all three of them agreed that what they did is messed up.
In Season 4, when he needs Ashley's help to get Sister Sage off his back when she suspects him for leaking the security footage that exonerated the Starlighters from killing three Homelander supporters, Ashley frames Cameron Coleman as the leaker to get back at him for dumping her. When Homelander orders the Seven to beat Cameron to death as punishment, all the Seven (minus Sister Sage, who doesn't like dirty work, and plus Cate and Sam) are more than happy to do it while A-Train is the only one disturbed by it.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: He's so self-centered that he believes his brother advising him to stop abusing Compound V for his own sake is because of jealousy. He also fails to comprehend why Hughie would want revenge on him for killing his girlfriend Robin; to A-Train, it was just an accident and he was the bigger victim.
Evil Virtues:
He starts developing Responsibility by the tail end of Season 3, and by Season 4, he's showing signs of growing a conscience, between actually apologizing to Hughie for killing Robin and genuinely seeming to mean it, leaking footage that exonerates a pair of Starlight followers that Homelander had framed for the deaths of some of his own followers (even if he does end up getting Anika killed for his crime) and saving Hughie from a homicidal Homelander who has his scent. As MM put it:
Mother's Milk: I think you spent so much time wearing that stupid-ass Black Power suit, pretending to give a shit, that something stuck.
He also has Gratitude up among these; part of the reason he gives the exonerating evidence is because Hughie and Starlight don't attempt to blackmail him for trying to just reconnect with his family.
Face Death with Dignity: Ironic given how he started out, but when he's finally been caught by Homelander, A-Train, rather than beg for his life, mocks Homelander to his face and goes out laughing at how pathetic he really is deep down.
Fastest Thing Alive: He has a reputation as the fastest man alive, and he feels it's the reason why he's in the Seven. Keeping this title is his biggest priority, and eventually destroys his personal life. However Homelander's actually way faster than him.note 
Fatal Flaw:
Pride and Greed. His need to be the best caused him to develop a dependency on Compound V that drove his older brother away. His addiction and refusal to take responsibility for his actions also caused the events of the series.
Self-loathing is also a huge one for him. Underneath the jerkassery and love for money, A-Train is disgusted and ashamed of himself for what he's become and what he's done working for Homelander and Vought. When he carries an unconscious MM to the hospital, seeing a child smile at him for this good deed gives him a rare moment where he didn't hate himself and this moment finally makes him pull a Heel–Face Turn.
Faux Affably Evil: He acts like a friendly and upbeat athlete/superhero when in public. Behind closed doors, he's an apathetic, self-absorbed asshole who would sooner fold the moment the going gets tough for him.. This changes as the series progresses as A-Train's growing introspection and remorse for his actions causes him to become genuinely nicer and try his hand at actual heroism.
Feeling Their Age: He's reaching the age when athletes start losing to younger competitors no matter how hard they train. This drives him to abuse Compound V as a performance enhancer in order to compensate for the age barrier and keep his title.
Fetish: Enjoys having his toes sucked on.
Foil:
To Hughie. Hughie is a middle-class tech salesman, while A-Train is a famous super-athlete. Both men have killed people, but while A-Train put the blame on his victim to rationalize his kill (presumably because this is something he's likely to do again), Hughie came to terms with what he did and avoids killing anyone else. Both also have super girlfriends, but while A-Train hides his relationship with Popclaw out of cowardice and yields to Vought's demands about their love, Hughie isn't the least bit ashamed of dating Starlight and furiously goes against Butcher for threatening her.
To the Deep. Both are Supes whose actions result in one person growing disillusioned with superhero culture (Hughie for A-Train, Annie for the Deep), and who are portrayed as vastly flawed individuals. Both also have extremely specialized powersets that define their characters — A-Train cannot stand others taking his title of fastest man alive, while Deep is regarded as a laughing stock due to his ability to talk to marine life. The similarities end here, though. While the Deep is portrayed as a rapist who can't have good sex even when it is consensual, A-Train was in a happy, committed relationship with Popclaw and is deeply saddened when Homelander bullies him into killing her. A-Train is very effective at using his powers when not high on Compound-V, while Deep's major outing in season 2 has him use his powers in an astronomically stupid manner that allows the Boys to escape him. Finally, while both characters have had hardships growing up (poverty for A-Train, bullying and body image issues for the Deep), A-Train's character arc shows that he is capable of moving beyond these and, slowly, turning away from his heinous actions to become a genuine hero. Deep, meanwhile, is repeatedly shown to be unable and unwilling to change his ways, suffers the consequences for it, and eventually decides to double down on his vices, becoming a remorseless murderer who takes pride in his vile actions.
A Fool and His New Money Are Soon Parted:
It's implied growing up in poverty, he never learned how to handle his money well and constantly blows his giant salary. In particular, after recovering from his coma at the beginning of Season 2, he randomly buys one of Prince's guitars on a whim despite not knowing how to play. After he's kicked out of the Seven and the money dries up, he's forced to sell personal belongings to make ends meet, and Alastair Adana reveals that he's in severe seven figure debt.
According to a deleted scene, despite making $40 million a year before taxation, he only has $240k left in his account. While some of it goes to necessary personnel like his lawyers, agents, and an accountant, most of it was wasted on things like his 13 houses, a private jet that a man with Super-Speed doesn't need, a private island he's never been to, and having the ashes of Jan-Michael Vincent shot into space. It's so bad that paying the accountant is also a waste of money because A-Train refuses to listen to his advice.
Formerly Fit: Downplayed in Season 3. As a result of no longer running as much due to the lingering effects of abusing Compound V and combined with the fact he hasn't kicked his usual diet of consuming 30,000 calories per day, he starts to develop a bit of a gut.
Freudian Excuse: Season 2 implies that his egotistical mindset, greed for money and need to be the best stems from his poor childhood, and his desire for everything comes from having nothing growing up.
Fragile Speedster: He becomes one due to his use of Compound V. His brother points out that his bones have gotten weaker and more brittle. Unfortunately for him, this makes it way too easy for Kimiko to break his leg.
Friend to All Children: Even at his worst, A-Train doesn't hurt or even act like a dick towards children and has a genuine soft spot for them. He makes a genuine effort to cheer up a terminally ill boy even though it fails horribly, sincerely loves and adores his nephews, and finally pulls a Heel–Face Turn when he sees a little boy smile at him after he sees him bring an unconscious MM to the hospital.
Glass Cannon: His super speed makes him a very powerful striker even by supe standards, hitting like... well, a train. However his durability isn't up to par; Kimiko easily breaks his leg with a single hit from a metal pipe and even the Deep is able to floor him with a sloppy bulrush. Though, both of these events are after his Compound V abuse takes a toll on his body.
Good Feels Good: A-Train sports his first genuine smile in the show after seeing a kid smiling at him for saving MM's life.
Greed: Season 2 makes it clear his main motivation, as a black guy growing up in a bad neighborhood, is money. Endless streams of it. When Starlight threatens to expose Compound V's existence to media, he's more concerned in personal monetary loss this could bring than anything else.
Grew a Spine: After spending most of the series in fear of Homelander's wrath, A-Train joins Starlight's resistance against him.
The Heavy: Homelander is the Big Bad, but the events of Season 1 are kicked off by A-Train's accidental murder of Robin, which motivates Hughie to join Butcher and subsequently leads to the Boys being reformed. He's the most consistently appearing Supe the Boys face over the course of the season, even fighting him in the climax as they escape Vought's black site. Averted in later seasons, where he is just another member of the Seven and eventually defecting them after growing a moral consciousness and becoming increasingly jaded and disgusted with their actions.
Heel–Face Revolving Door: Has a serious issue with sticking to either his redemption path or continue being a selfish prick. Whenever it seems he might be slowly trying to do something good for a change, it is soon undermined by his ego or opportunistic behavior (or the good deed is revealed as opportunism itself).
Heel–Face Turn: Finally realizes one in Season 4, making amends with Hughie and helping the Boys as a secret associate before fully turning on Homelander and the Seven in Episode 7. Though he was already well on the path to turning, the catalyst for A-Train's redemption was taking MM to the hospital and seeing a kid giving him a genuine smile. He later states that little moment was better than anything he ever felt under Vought. By Season 5, he's considered by most members of the group as well as official promotional materials to be one of The Boys, meaning that he's fully committed to doing good.
Heel Realization: A few times, but never enough to stick.
He gets a tiny one when holding Hughie's father hostage, and rummaging through Hughie's room. When Hughie comes as agreed to surrender in exchange for his dad's safety, A-Train notes that Hughie got rare merchandise of the Seven, and finds out that he was the guys' favorite Supe. He says quietly, "You were a fan" and not a typical kid on the street asking for a selfie.
During his confrontation with Hughie at the climax of season 1, A-Train admits to both Hughie and himself that he was the one who killed Popclaw. He actually seems affected by his own admission and looks down in regret for a few seconds, but quickly rallies back and says "but it was your fault" before attempting to kill him.
After Blue Hawk crippled his brother, Nathan, in a senseless, racially motivated attack, A-Train goes ballistic and calls out Ashley for being dismissive of the attack and only lightly punishing Blue Hawk for what he did. Only to be taken aback when Ashley calls A-Train a hypocrite for relying on Vought for similar damage control after the people he killed so carelessly (i.e. accidentally killing Robin in season 1 by running through her). After realising that Vought won't help him and will continue to cover for Blue Hawk, he takes it upon himself to avenge Nathan by hauling a still-conscious Blue Hawk for miles behind him along an asphalt road, resulting in Blue Hawk dying violently as he's left as a mutilated carcass on a destroyed road (which also results in A-Train having another heart attack as he exceeded his limit out of vengeance). He also gives a sincere apology to Hughie about Robin, finally understanding his anger and desire for revenge.
He's Back!: By the end of Season 2, he's fully recovered from his V addiction, and is let back into the Seven following Shockwave's death.
Heroic Sacrifice: Twofold. First, by showing up to the Freedom Camp breakout despite knowing that Homelander will almost certainly kill him. Secondly, by diving to avoid lethally crashing into a civilian, causing himself to crash and Homelander to catch up to him.
Hero with an F in Good: He'd like to be a good person, or at least like to see himself as one - it's just that his attempts often fail due to either Vought's influence, his own impulsiveness, his own moral failings, or a combination of all three.
A-Train does see the writing on the wall after being informed of how Homelander and Stormfront are inciting white supremacy and radicalising their audience and tries to reconnect with the black community. However, Vought removed all subtlety from his plan by making it appear insincere by attempting to appease the masses. As shown by the "A-Train to Africa" poster, the disastrous energy drink commercial, and his inability to convince the Seven to help him stop Blue Hawk. Nathan even tries to direct him on how to help the community but A-Train has put his public image first despite the fact that he wants to help.
He brings the racist supe Blue Hawk to a recreational center to apologize. It goes terribly, with Blue Hawk assaulting several people and paralyzing A-Train's brother. He later tries to make up for that not by getting any sort of justice, but by brutally murdering Blue Hawk, martyring him. As his brother says when he tries to help it makes things worse.
Hidden Depths: After he was ejected from the Seven, it's shown that he's a surprisingly effective detective/saboteur, being the one to find damning evidence on Stormfront's Nazi origins. Presumably before this, he simply never needed to use his speed in such a way.
Hidden Disdain Reveal: After revealing himself as The Mole in Vought, he takes a moment to tell The Deep that he has always despised him before swiftly kicking his ass.
Hoist by His Own Petard: In "You Found Me", his Compound V abuse gives him a heart-attack, and over the first half of Season 2, Homelander learns this from A-Train's heartbeat, and kicks him out of the Seven after he concludes A-Train cannot run as fast as before.
Humiliation Conga: Experiences this in Season 2. After recovering from his heart-attack, he knows Annie is working against The Seven and can't do anything about it. He continues to experience heart problems as he runs, causing Homelander to take notice and kick him out of the team to keep up appearances. This means that all of his efforts to stay in The Seven as the Fastest Man Alive, from abusing Compound V to killing Popclaw, have gone to waste, and Ashley makes sure that he complies with their plans. In an act of desperation, he accepts The Deep's invitation into the Church of the Collective.
It continues in Season 3. He's still struggling with his powers, he's not as popular as he used to be, Homelander frequently uses him as both a verbal and physical punching bag and at one point chooses to side with the Deep over him and his attempted rebranding around his African-American identity is so transparent, self-centered and amateurish nobody buys it for even a second.
And just to add a little more humilitation, After killing Blue Hawk by dragging him along for miles at super-speed and nearly dying from a heart attack, A-Train wakes up in a hospital bed learning that Vought have given him a heart transplant with Blue Hawk's heart. Just imagine knowing you now have the heart of a lionized racist bigot who terrorised black people and crippled your own brother.
Hypocrite:
He says he has the moral high ground over Hughie in their confrontation in season 1, because him killing Robin was an accident, while all of Hughie's criminal activity was on purpose. Except he also killed Popclaw, gave weapons to terrorists, threatened to kill Hughie's uninvolved dad, and later sold out Super Sonic so Homelander could kill him, none of which was accidental. Also, since he killed Robin in the process of committing another illegal act, the crime is still murder. He also showed little personal accountability of it in the first place.
In Season 3 he insults the Deep for being such a suck-up to Homelander, when he's just as bad if not worse. Which Starlight points out to his face after he sold Supersonic out to Homelander on the plan to overthrow him... which was after he called out the Deep.
A-Train: (Looks around) Homelander's a great man, (Lower his voice) but the way that you kiss his ass is fucking gross.
[...]
Starlight: You're pathetic. Why are you so desperate to be with people who hate you?
He's enraged that Blue Hawk is able to get away with crippling Nathan due to a Vought coverup. Ashley absolutely tears into him over how much work has been putting into covering up his crimes.
Ignored Epiphany:
He admits to Hughie with pain in his voice that he was the one who killed Popclaw. For a brief moment, A-Train stops antagonizing Hughie as he seemingly realizes how his own terrible choices led to the destruction of his personal life. The moment then passes, and A-Train goes right back to blaming Hughie for making him do all those terrible things.
He has another moment in Season 3 when he sees how easily Homelander will throw away any of his lackeys on a whim. It doesn't take long before he's crawling back like a battered housewife, showing that he's become as pathetic as the Deep.
He seems to finally get over being a physical and moral Dirty Coward for the last three seasons in "Herogasm", when he acknowledges that Hughie has every right to hate him and seemingly sacrifices his life to kill Blue Hawk. But when he unexpectedly lives and is offered the chance to keep his money and reputation in exchange for going along with a fake story that turns Blue Hawk into a martyr, with the side effect that both his and Blue Hawk's crimes will retroactively be swept under the rug and the latter's victims denied justice, he jumps back on without hesitation. He even goes back to sucking up to Homelander, being one of the only other two remaining members of the "Seven" along with the Deep. At this point Nate is done with giving him more chances and tells him to get out of his life... at which point, ironically, he does begin to finally turn good out of remorse for alienating his family and hurting several people.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: A-Train is so wrapped up in being the fastest man alive that he's paranoid of any other speedster taking that title and replacing him in the Seven, to the point where he's willing to abuse Compound V to maintain his place. His paranoia is however well-justified - when being temporarily Brought Down to Normal due to a broken leg, he's instantly a victim of Profiling, as his entire gimmick is being the fastest guy on Earth.
Informed Flaw: The after-effects of his V addiction supposedly left A-Train with a coin toss on whether or not he'll die the next time he uses his powers, yet he had no problem using them for most of Season 2 and 3, even using it for filming a commercial. Though, the commercial could very well have used CGI for his super speed. It does finally catch up to him by the end of season 3, where another overuse of his power causes a fatal heart attack and necessitating a heart transplant to save his life.
Innocently Insensitive: A-Train is tasked with visiting children with cancer at a hospital, filling in for the absent Translucent, whose disappearance is kept as a secret from the large public. Though A-Train lacks the necessary social skills for such a situation, this is one of the rare moments where his good intentions are genuine. His attempt to bring cheer falls flat with his choice of gifts. He brings an A-Train figurine, rather than a Translucent to a boy that asked for Translucent. He has no idea what to say and goes on a rant about how cool he is too, to which the boy can't help but roll his eyes. His encouragement to teach the kid run as fast as him if he gets better shows how blissfully ignorant he is. The boy sarcastically asks if he can be thought to outrun cancer, to which A-Train is rendered speechless.
It's All About Me: It's all about the A-Train in this station. When Popclaw dies, he's more upset about how he lost someone close to him and moreover, he killed her himself, and in general he'll toss away his loved ones in a heartbeat if it means keeping his place in the Seven for one more day. When Hughie finally confronts him about how he killed Robin, his response boils down to "yeah, but what about my pain?" Later seasons downplay and eventually subvert this trait as A-Train is shown to care about his family, becomes ashamed of killing Robin, getting increasingly uneasy and disgusted by his teammates' callous nature, showing concern toward Ashley, and even genuinely wanting to help the Boys out.
It's Personal with the Dragon: Despite Homelander being the Big Bad of the show, Hughie, the Audience Surrogate, has the most personal beef with A-Train instead, due to the speedster killing his girlfriend, expressing zero remorse for doing so, and later blaming Hughie for "making him" kill Popclaw.
Jerkass: He is an arrogant douchebag who treats everyone like crap, including his brother, Nathan, when he expresses concern about A-Train's drug abuse, and extorts Popclaw into doing what he wants by holding their relationship hostage.
Jerkass Has a Point:
His remark that "There are more important things than money" is something only someone who didn't grow up poor would say, does ring true from a certain perspective. If you don't have enough to take care of your basic needs, those "more important things" become a whole lot less important.
Subverted when he tries to justify his actions to Hughie by claiming he didn't intend to kill Robin. While that's definitely true, not only was A-Train not remorseful in the slightest, he even went as far as to crack a joke at Robin's expense not knowing that Hughie was watching him on video. Whether or not he intended to kill Robin is irrelevant to Hughie's suffering, as he's still fully aware that he did so and didn't care. That is, until Season 3 where he grows to understand Hughie's suffering after Blue Hawk cripples his brother. Causing A-Train to understand Hughie's anger and even deliver a genuine apology.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Becomes this as the series progresses. A-Train grows enough of a conscience to make an effort to helping others, even if they're mishandled badly and genuinely cares for his family. In Season 4, he even starts to help his former enemies, namely saving Hughie from Homelander and helping the Boys in taking on Deep and New Noir when the two break into their headquarters. And though they're on frosty terms, he shows some degree of concern for Ashley, knowing they're both trapped in a terrible situation as Homelander's need for control and authority grows worse other time.
Jerk Jock: He's the best runner in the world and he's gained an ego to match it.
Karma Houdini:
He gets away with basically committing DUI manslaughter with nothing but an insincere apology which would usually result in several years behind bars, and later laughs about it. Hughie's fury about A-Train's lack of punishment and remorse is what leads him to join the Boys and make A-Train pay by any means necessary.
By the end of Season 2, he's been brought back into the Seven after he helps The Boys take down Stormfront and seems to have at least partially recovered from his heart condition, undoing the punishments brought on him by the end of the first season. At least he made up for the former by exposing Stormfront first.
Karma Houdini Warranty: While Season 2 does end with him being let back into the Seven, Season 3 reveals that he's still a No-Respect Guy who's powers are failing him and who's still on the risk of dying due to his Compound V abuse. He's also been kicked down to Butt-Monkey status by Homelander, frequently overlooked in favor of the Deep and his one attempt to do a genuinely good thing (confronting Blue Hawk about his repeated Police Brutality) ended in disaster.
Kick the Dog: The night after he ran over an innocent woman, he's seen laughing it off in a private conversation with another superhero. Downplayed later, when he seems to show some regret for the incident.
Kill the Ones You Love: He assassinates his beloved girlfriend Popclaw to hide the secret of Compound V. He's visibly remorseful and ashamed of himself after the act, but it's pretty clear that Homelander would've done something far worse to her and him if he didn't do it.
Lack of Empathy: He outright laughs about killing an innocent woman, and doesn't even bother remembering her name by calling her an "accident." Subverted later on in Season 3, when he starts to feel guilty about the damage he's done in the past. He even apologizes to Hughie for running through Robin.
Legacy Character: A colder approach to this given the show's commentary on superheroes as a corporate product. As "A-Train" is their trademark, they intend to give the title and costume to Shockwave when he formally replaces the current A-Train on the team, much to his protest.
Leonine Contract: Downplayed. In Season 4, MM tells him that they have enough dirt on him to bury him, and coerce him to cooperate with them, which will put him at risk of Homelander's wrath. However, MM notes that A-Train wants to pull a Heel–Face Turn and might not need to blackmail him anyways.
A Lighter Shade of Black: A-Train is shown to be unrepentantly selfish and has engaged in manslaughter and murder, but he's usually portrayed as having the moral high ground compared to The Deep. The Deep is shown to be an unrepentant Jerkass who never owns up to his crimes, while A-Train at least has some remorse for what he has done. Additionally, while The Deep is a Weak-Willed Dirty Coward who is easily cowed by figures of authority (see how he folds before the Church of the Collective), A-Train is more assertive, only backing down in the face of Homelander. Season 3 expands on this — while both betray someone who trusted them to secure their spot on the team (A-Train tells Homelander about Starlight and Supersonic, leading Homelander to murder the latter to make an example to Starlight, while The Deep eats his own octopus friend alive to regain a place in the Seven), The Deep largely uses this as an opportunity to advance himself. A-Train, meanwhile, tries to use this goodwill to help improve things with other African Americans, and genuinely puts an effort into making amends with his brother. Exaggerated in Season 4 when A-Train starts to show genuine remorse for his actions, even openly agreeing with Starlight he deserves to be blasted by her and actually enjoys doing heroic deeds with no benefits, while The Deep begins relishing murder and fully devotes himself to Homelander, even shedding his redeeming quality of caring about sea life.
Makes Us Even: After Hughie and Annie hold the fact that they saved him when he went through a Compound V-induced heart attack at the end of Season 1 over his head, he decides that providing intel on Stormfront to take her down settles things. The less-than-altruistic motivation hampers this, however.
Meaningful Name:
His superhero name and the blue color of his uniform are derived from the New York City Subway service, a service that has sociological significance for connecting New York City's two largest African American neighborhoods (Harlem and Bedford–Stuyvesant).
Whenever he uses his superspeed, he gives off a sound similar to a train horn as he breaks the sound barrier.
Mirror Character: With Blue Hawk. Despite A-Train being black, and Blue Hawk being Police Brutality embodied as a supe, it's made particularly clear by Ashley that there's similarities. As she points out, A-Train has committed just as many (if not more) crimes such as running through Robin and killing her. In addition, both of them barely regretted the collateral damage they caused, both giving extremely bored, boilerplate apologies. To drive some of this home, A-Train is given Blue Hawk's heart after killing him.
Mistreatment-Induced Betrayal: It takes four seasons, but a combination of heavy abuse from Vought, Homelander, and other members of the Seven, the cost of losing his family because of the chaos around him, and the feeling of pride he gets in genuine heroics without Vought micromanaging them all drive him to finally ally with the Boys and betray Homelander. Homelander, of course, can't understand why A-Train would betray him.
Money Dumb: In a deleted scene from Season 2, A-Train is depicted as a spendthrift with extravagant lifestyle habits, lacking the financial acumen to manage his income effectively and not be even aware how intellectual property works. Despite earning a staggering salary of $40 million annually, his accountant informs him that his accounts are nearly depleted. Of course, a part of them were used as pay-roll for the people working for him, and others were just carelessly spent by A-Train on 13 houses, an island he never visited, a private jet and for sending Jan-Michael Vincent's ashes into space. A-Train is unaware that the "A-Train" brand belongs to Vought, and it can prevent him from profiting off his superhero identity outside of the Seven.
My God, What Have I Done?: After his brother is crippled and Ashley gives him a brutal dressing-down when he demands justice, A-Train becomes riddled with guilt over getting the person he loves the most hurt to the point he finally gives Hughie a genuine apology for killing Robin. It happens again when he realizes he's killed any chance of reconciling with Nate by murdering Blue Hawk and letting Vought cover up the truth.
Named by the Adaptation: His real name was never revealed in the comics. Here, he's given the name Reggie Franklin.
Neck Snap: In season 5, A-Train meets his end by Homelander this way.
Never My Fault: A-Train pins the blame of Popclaw's death on Hughie and the Boys since them blackmailing her is what led to him to killing her, ignoring the fact that he was the one who went through with ending her life. Interestingly Double Subverted in the Season 1 finale, in which he admits that Popclaw's blood is on his hands in the final episode of the first season, but points out Hughie's involvement is still what led to Homelander ordering her death. He still could have refused, of course.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: After many prods from his brother, A-Train finally arranges for Blue Hawk to at least deliver an Ordered Apology to the black community in Trenton, in a first in ages good deed. The resulting conference is a total disaster, and in the end Blue Hawk ends up crippling Nathan, leaving him in a wheelchair.
Noodle Incident: According to Homelander's Reddit AMA, he once released an album. Even more bizarrely, Homelander actually liked it.
No-Respect Guy:
Gets demoted to this after Homelander kicks him out of the Seven. It's so bad that even Ashley refuses to put up with his bullshit anymore and overrides any objections he may have under threat of terminating his severance package.
This continues even after he's been let back into the Seven in Season 3. Homelander frequently belittles and mocks him for the loss of his speed, even at one point bullying him for allegedly getting fat due to overeating (even though A-Train points out his powers make him require more calories than the average person). His popularity is dwindling and his attempts to re-brand himself around his blackness are so transparent even Ashley hates them. To put the cherry on top, even the Deep, the show's desginated Butt-Monkey, has no respect for him anymore and mouths off to him.
Not So Similar: He's distraught over Popclaw's death and tries to compare his situation with Robin's death to guilt Hughie. Hughie notes how what they went through is vastly different.
Older Than They Think: In-universe, Vought publicly hails A-Train as the "first black member of The Seven" while zealously hiding that the very oldest member of the team, Black Noir, is black.
Only Sane Man: Downplayed, but after Black Noir's apparent death, Maeve's "demise" and Starlight's Resign in Protest, he is the only sane if unscrupulous person in what was left of the Seven; Homelander is an Omnicidal Maniac who could snap anytime, the Deep is a Lethally Stupid rapist and animal fucker, and Ashley is a Beleaguered Assistant to Homelander going bald from stress.
He fully evolves in this role in Season 4, being the only member of the remaining Seven with anything resembling a conscience. He is the only one not taking part in the sadistic murders that Homelander orders and was disgusted to see with what joy his fellows engage in the murders.
Pay Evil unto Evil: After Blue Hawk shoots down an unarmed black man, attacks a small crowd of black people, and cripples A-Train's brother, A-Train finally gives him what's coming to him by dragging him on a road for miles at super speed, leaving Blue Hawk nothing more than a horribly mutilated corpse.
Pet the Dog: Despite being a total scumbag, A-Train does have his moments, particularly whenever he's close to a Heel Realization.
When Translucent can't visit a terminally ill Make A Wish child in the hospital, A-Train fills in and makes a genuine effort to cheer him up. It goes horribly wrong on several different levels but he gave it the old college try.
In Season 3, he makes a genuine effort to reconnect with his brother, and arranges for Blue Hawk to at least offer an Ordered Apology to the black community in Trenton. Blue Hawk turns things into a fiasco due to his own racism, and ends up crippling A-Train's brother such that he is left permanently paralyzed.
In relation to the above, A-Train also sincerely appreciates that Starlight stands up for him when he announces that Blue Hawk is engaging in Police Brutality.
When he meets Hughie at Herogasm, A-Train sincerely apologizes for the first time about Robin and acknowledges that Hughie has every right to hate him.
During Season 4, A-Train gives Annie and Hughie exculpatory evidence to get the two "starlighters" being charged with murder off the hook, as a thanks for not embarrassing him in front of his family. Notably, this places him at serious risk, without him really gaining anything, indicating that he might actually be close to a Heel–Face Turn.
Playing the Victim Card: Whenever someone confronts him about his actions, A-Train's first response is to feel sorry for himself and tell everyone that he was not only forced to do what he did, he was also the true victim. When Hughie confronts him, A-Train starts lamenting on how he suffered more than Hughie and that killing Robin was just an accident. Something Hughie attacks and points out, "That accident had a name."
Pragmatic Villainy: In Season 2, he's shown to be willing to work with Annie and Hughie, both people who he despises, to get Stormfront out of his path of rejoining the Seven.
Professional Butt-Kisser: He gets into a contest with the Deep throughout Season 3 to see who can more effectively suck up to Homelander. He even goes out of his way to refer to Homelander as "a great man" when no one else is around, just in case Homelander might be listening, and sells out the only supe who showed him respect because it meant he could better get into Homelander's good graces. By Season 4, it comes to a point where Homelander realizes how much his underlings are obsequious yes-man, particularly the Deep, and to prove his point he orders him to give A-Train a blow job. When he subsequently orders A-Train to stand up, he obeys and is reluctantly willing to be a part of the degrading act had Homelander not canceled it.
Properly Paranoid: In Season 4, after Reggie fully defects from the Seven by rescuing the Boys and removing his tracking chip, he also brings his family along to go into hiding with him. This was a very good call, as Firecracker reveals to Homelander that they searched his family's home but found it empty, likely planning to execute them as punishment for his betrayal.
Rags to Riches: He's a classic story of the American Dream, going from a poor black boy from the South Side of Chicago who grew up to a single mother working two jobs to make ends meet, to a celebrity superhero and athlete making millions a year. Unfortunately, his lack of financial skills means he's fast on track to go from Riches to Rags, especially after he loses his income as a member of the Seven.
Redemption Earns Life: A-Train finishes Season 3 by having a heart intervention and receiving Blue Hawk's heart. In Season 4 he tries to atone for all of his wrongdoings. 
Redemption Equals Death: In Season 5, he dies at Homelander's hands after rescuing the Boys from an internment camp. A-Train could have gotten away with his life at the cost of killing an innocent woman the same way he'd done to Robin. After all his Character Development, he instead chooses to swerve out of the way.
Redemption Quest: He goes on this in season 4, seeking to make amends for his actions, such as getting Compound V for Hughie so he can save his father and realizing that Good Feels Good after he saves MM’s life and a kid smiles at him while witnessing him do so.
Required Secondary Powers: On top of the general Super-Strength that most supes seem to have, A-Train has enough physical resistance to survive running at supersonic speeds, and enough lower-body strength to pull a freight train with a broken leg.
Revenge Is Not Justice: He kills Blue Hawk for attacking and killing several black people and paralyzing his brother, but this ends up sweeping Blue Hawk's crimes under the rug and making sure that the people he murdered will never get their justice. Nathan disowns him after finding out about this.
Sacrificial Lion: He's the first casualty of the final season, at the hands of Homelander. His death is to solidify the fact that absolutely no one, not even the main characters, are safe from dying by that point.
Secret Relationship: He has one with Popclaw. His refusal to go public about it is what drives her to eventually cheat on him.
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: A-Train's fear of being replaced and need to be number one led to him abusing Compound V to stay on top. However, this ends up causing him to have a heart attack that cripples his performance and causes exactly what he wanted to avoid.
Signature Sound Effect: When passing by using his super speed, a sound akin to a train's horn is heard.
Spanner in the Works: It's ultimately him who took the first shot at Stormfront after it's made clear she's the reason why the Church won't seriously consider him for reinstatement into The Seven.
The Speedster: As the Seven are a darker take on the Justice League, A-Train is their equivalent of the Flash, possessing Super-Speed as his only superpower.
Sticky Fingers: Homelander gave him Compound V so he could give it to terrorists around the world and create Supe villains to help Vought get a military contract, but he's been filching some so he can fuel his addiction and keep his spot in the Seven.
Story-Breaker Power: He's the only recurring threat with Super-Speed besides Homelander, and while Homelander is plainly incapable of using his own speed for anything other than flying in a straight line (as his underwhelming fights make clear), A-Train is actually capable of fighting at super speed, at least in bursts (albeit, not at the same speeds he can run in a straight line). Ordinarily this would make him a rather hard antagonist to write; he can pummel basically any supe who's not massively stronger/tougher than him (e.g. Homelander and Soldier Boy) effortlessly with them not really being able to retaliate (as shown by his one-sided thrashings of Kimiko, Starlight, Blue Hawk and the Deep), and he can flat-out liquify normal humans by running through them. You can't even avoid him. A stopgap measure in season 1 was having Kimiko break his leg in an ambush (taking advantage of the fact that he has to turn on his Super-Reflexes rather than just always perceiving the world in slow motion), but he recovered. Luckily, he's suffering from a heart condition due to his heavy usage of Compound V, which limits how often he can use his main power, and conveniently causes him to collapse right before he can deliver the coup de grace to Starlight and Hughie at the climax of season 1. He spends the next two seasons neutered and is told that he only has a few more runs left before his condition outright kills him, so he mostly avoids using his main powers at all. When he does he eventually suffers another heart attack in the course of killing Blue Hawk, which he only survives through getting a transplant... from Blue Hawk. In season 4, where he's recovered and is no longer at risk of dying, he basically pulls a Heel–Face Turn early on, thus negating the problem of having to write around a super-fast villain. As an ally though he instead serves as a convenient Deus ex Machina whenever the Boys get in trouble: he easily gets the info that exonerates the two Starlighters accused of murder, saves Hughie when the latter is in danger from being killed by Homelander, and bails out Butcher and Starlight when they're about to be killed by the Deep and Black Noir II.
Super-Reflexes: A Required Secondary Power so he can control his Super-Speed. The finale shows his reflexes are such that he perceives and moves as if time is flowing normally for him, but everything else is moving incredibly slow. It's a sign of his decline in Season 3 that Hughie is able to punch him in the face to which A-Train responds with genuine shock as his powers usually allow him to effortlessly dodge attacks.
Super-Speed: His main superpower. He also trains and competes with this skill similar to a professional racer.
Super-Strength: He backhands Kimiko right through a concrete wall.
Super-Toughness: It's a required secondary power for a speedster like him, allowing him to withstand powerful impacts. However, as his brother reveals his abuse of Compound V is weakening his bones, like some real-life steroids.
Taking You with Me: When Starlight inflicts this by ruining their reputations with blackmail, he tries to turn it around against her. It doesn't work since she'd be fine with it anyway and more importantly, she's aware A-Train is bluffing, since he would only dig himself deeper when trying to drag her down.
Token Good Teammate: Downplayed given the vastness and severity of his crimes by that point, but A-Train becomes this by Season 4 of those currently in the Seven, not entirely being in agreement with Homelander's maniacal schemes as well as showing unease towards him. Noticeably, he’s the only member between him, Deep and the 2nd Black Noir that doesn’t murder anyone under Homelander’s orders in the first episode. Compounding this is how he helps Hughie and Annie in freeing the two men accused of murdering Todd and his fellow two Homelander loony fans and later saving Hughie from Homelander. As the season goes along, he gradually becomes genuinely heroic until he defects from The Seven and joins The Boys. 
Token Minority: He was the only black member of The Seven for a long time and officially the first African-American to join. Until Black Noir's Dramatic Unmask reveals that he's black too, as well as Sister Sage joining in Season 4. The puppet Christmas special that Vought puts out emphasises his race by giving him an exaggerated accent that sounds nothing like the real A-Train.
Took a Level in Kindness: Goes from laughing at the memory of killing Robin to genuinely apologizing to Hughie for it. His Character Development is all about him slowly going from a Dirty Coward to a genuine hero who enjoys doing the right thing.
Two First Names: Both "Reggie" and "Franklin" are usable as given names.
Ungrateful Bastard:
It seems Starlight and Hughie saving his life hasn't bought them any capital with him. When he finds out Starlight is smuggling out Compound V, he threatens to take it to Homelander and shows glee at her impending painful death. This is later downplayed come the second season finale where he gives Starlight and Hughie crucial info on Stormfront, and calls it his way of returning the favor, but it's more of a means of getting back at Stormfront and requisitioning his position in the Seven in reality.
In Season 3, Supersonic is the only one in the Seven who's still kind to him and even helps him after a fight with the Deep. When Supersonic informs him about his and Starlight's plans to fight Homelander, the first thing A-Train does is run to Homelander and tattle so he'll get his standing back.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: A-Train accidentally killing Hughie's girlfriend, Robin in a high-velocity impact causes Butcher to seek out Hughie to join The Boys. This results in Hughie killing Translucent and the rest of the Disaster Dominoes falling thanks to A-Train's actions. His part in Homelander's plan to make super terrorists to fight also indirectly caused Kimiko and other lives to be ruined.
In Season 4, Hughie blames A-Train for singlehandedly causing the events of the entire series. Considering everything that happened, he's not entirely wrong.
Hughie: Every single fucked up horrible thing that has ever happened to me, to all of us, it all started with you. You took away someone I loved.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: A-Train is suggested to have been a good guy before he joined Vought: as he has shown to care for his brother, his relationship with Popclaw was genuine and he really did overcome a less than ideal home-life. Fame and fortune from being on the Seven, his desire to be the best (to maintain his position on the Seven), and his ensuing dependency on Compound-V made him forget why he wanted to be a hero in the first place.
Villain Has a Point: Subverted. A-Train starts out as a jerk and gets worse from there. On at least one point however, he is right: his killing of Robin wasn't intentional, while the same can't be said of Hughie's acts with the Boys. However, it's pointed out that his dismissive attitude because it was an accident doesn't mean he wasn't still responsible for murder, and Hughie isn't satisfied with A-Train's lack of empathy on the matter.
What You Are in the Dark:
He agreed to procure some Compound V for Hughie if it would earn his forgiveness. When A-Train fulfilled his end of the bargain, he cynically states that Hughie's still holding a grudge against him, which Hughie disproves by offering a handshake and saying they're officially good now, grateful that A-Train would make the effort in spite of his doubts.
In the first episode of the final season, A-Train is running for his life to avoid a murderous Homelander, and while he keeps a good distance between the two of them (and can avoid shots from Homelander's heat vision) an unsuspecting woman happens to cross his path, meaning he either could keep going and maintain his level of speed while murdering an innocent person, or he could avoid her which would cause him to go careening off his escape path and cause Homelander catch up to him. He chooses the latter, and spares her life at the cost of his own, cementing his Character Development as genuine.
When He Smiles: After a child spots him performing an act of heroism of his own volition, A-Train gets a smile of admiration. He smiles back out of gratitude, and unlike his public appearances this smile is 100% genuine.
White Man's Burden: The new movie detailing A-Train's origin story bastardizes several details so that his honest hard-working brother is now a drug-dealer and the role of trainer that originally belong to his brother has now gone to Coach Brink (played by Will Ferrell), who in this universe wants to exploit A-Train's history for the sake of raising his profile.