Alternate Company Equivalent: In Season 5 Ashley gets a second face that argues with her, making Ashley a more literal take on Two Face.
Ambition Is Evil: Aside from the fear for her life after realizing how dangerous working with Homelander is, what motivated her is that as long as she did what he wanted he would keep promoting her to figurehead but still prestigious position, up to CEO of Vought. The authority leads her to refuse a Heel–Face Turn offered by Annie in Season 3, coping that she is CEO and doesn't have to listen to someone who barges into her office anymore. By Season 4 she realizes just how evil the corporate world turned her.
Anti-Villain: Ashley is not the best person by any means, often coming across as a neurotic and mean boss by cussing out or degrading her underlings and having more interest in the public image than doing what's right. That being said, she's not a sociopath and reacts to Homelander's actions with appropriate shock and horror. She remains complicit in many of his crimes mostly as a way to avoid his deadly wrath rather than having an outright malicious agenda of her own, and has (albeit, very rare) moments of sincere sympathy and insight. Ashley's brand of mundane villainy seems to represent the shallowness of the corporate world more than anything else.
Authority in Name Only: Homelander brings her back in Season 2 to replace Stillwell as the Seven's manager, except Homelander immediately makes it clear she's nothing more than a puppet for him. Even the rest of the Seven don't respect her and flat out ignore her orders at times. In Season 3 she gets promoted to CEO in Edgar's place, yet it is Homelander who sits at the head of the table and to whom the board answers to. In Season 4, Homelander outright tells her Sage will now be running the company in all but name.
Baldness Angst: She wears a wig to cover up her balding scalp and even dares to weakly deny it at first when Homelander orders her to take it off.
Baldness Means Sickness:
Specifically, a mental/psychological sickness. In Season 3, the stress of dealing with Homelander has caused her to start suffering from trichotillomania. By the season finale, she has to start wearing a wig to cover up the fact that she's nearly bald from literally tearing her hair out.
By the fourth Season Finale, it becomes a physical case as Ashley takes a dose of Compound V out of desperation after hearing that she'll be included in the list of purges of the Vought employees by Homelander. Unsurprisingly, the effects lead to Ashley having a Painful Transformation with a Cliffhanger of whether or not her new Supe physiology would be functioning.
Became Their Own Antithesis: Season 4 reveals that she was once a liberal hippie, even wearing a shirt with Che Guevara in one photo. Years later, she became the CEO of a conservative company, which gradually became led by a fascist.
Beleaguered Assistant: She comes across as one to Stillwell, and ends up being fired over Starlight exposing the sexual assault by the Deep. And then in Season 2, she's hired back for Stillwell's job... and even then it's still pure suffering, given she's working directly with Homelander and Stormfront.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: She can barely conceal her disdain for Starlight beneath her condescendingly friendly mask.
Blood-Spattered Innocents: During the hearing of Jonah Vogelbaum, two people near her have their heads exploded, covering her in blood.
Break the Haughty: In Season 3, she gives a "The Reason You Suck" Speech to A-Train and refuses to press charges after Blue Hawk cripples his brother. Considering how much of a self-absorbed Hypocrite he is, A-Train definitely needed to be knocked down a peg or two.
Bright Is Not Good: She often wears colorful clothes, like orange, blue, yellow and red, and is the high-ranking member of Vought. Not to mention that the way she dresses is a crime itself.
Bullying a Dragon: She makes a lot of derogatory remarks to the Deep, who just takes it because he is too insecure in himself. When Sage tells the Deep to stand up for himself all it takes is a few stern words for her to remember how powerful he is.
Butt-Monkey: Treated as beneath contempt by almost all of the supes she works with. When she and Homelander fire A-Train, the pink-slipped supe sneeringly identifies Ashley as the person who "used to get [his] coffee." And then there's the Congressional hearing where she ends up covered in blood from nearby exploding heads... The stress downright makes Ashley lose clumps of her hair!
Catchphrase: In Season 1, when addressing Starlight's concerns, she always says "and that is why we love you," before immediately telling her to stick to the Vought-approved script.
Chain of Harm: Part of her Mean Boss characteristics. Homelander abuses her verbally whenever he has a bad day, so she later takes that out on her subordinates, and when she becomes a little bit Drunk with Power she openly berates The Deep and A-Train. In Season 4, The Deep also ends up beginning to abuse her verbally as well.
Character Tic: Pulls at her hair whenever she's stressed out. She's pulled at it so much because of the shitshow in Season 2, Ashley has a front row to that she's on her way to becoming prematurely bald.
Closet Geek: She seems to really like musicals, like Hamilton and Cats. She was also really excited to hear that Lin-Manuel Miranda could play Translucent in one of their movies.
Covert Pervert: While her fetishes aren't as weird as those of Supes', she still manages to rank pretty high. She apparently likes sado-maso sex with the use of dildos with her own employees and when she was down on the dumps she became a nymphomaniac, sleeping with a lot of men in Spain.
Dark Action Girl: After hearing that the Seven were going to get rid of her, Ashley quickly took Compound V, now she is a Supe with Body Horror.
Dirty Coward: Justified. Ashley is a Professional Butt-Kisser who will bow down to Homelander's every command and constantly stroke his ego, regardless of how immoral it is to do so. However, given that Homelander is an Ax-Crazy Physical God, it wouldn't be a good idea for her to piss him off.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Despite most of the time being a souless corporate puppet, she has shown sympathy for Maeve on several occasions.
Drunk with Power: Downplayed, but in Season 3 she finally starts using her new position to her own personal gain. She even manages to publicly berate A-Train and The Deep and in Season 4 she orchestrates the death of Cameron Coleman, something she wouldn't do earlier.
Dumbass Has a Point: Downplayed in that she's not at all dumb, but she's certainly less intelligent than Sage. She warns said Supe against pushing her luck with Homelander. Sage may be the smartest person in the world, but Homelander is spiraling further and further into outright madness, which makes him totally unpredictable and very dangerous to even be in the same room with.
Emergency Transformation: At the end of season 4, Homelander launches a lethal purge on all Vought employees who pose even to smallest threat to his new regime, so Ashley shoots herself up with some V as a last resort. Her season ends in a painful bone-cracking transformation, leaving the final result to a cliffhanger. Season 5 reveals that she gained a psychic tumour on the back of her head, which she keeps hidden by her wig.
Even Evil Has Standards: While she's a self-centered and controlling careerist, she has moments where she caves to basic humanity.
In general she is always shocked or horrified whenever she witnesses extreme violence, in stark contrast to the nonchalant reaction of the Supes that she works with.
She's visibly disgusted watching a teenager at the religious themed Believe Expo being told it's her "responsibility" to convert her friends of other religions to Christianity, whether they consent or not.
She is horrified when Homelander brutally bursts the eardrums of Blindspot and leaves him a crying, bloody mess on the floor.
When Maeve has a drunken threesome with some men after Elena leaves her, Ashley is horrified at the thought this will tarnish Maeve's reputation as a lesbian icon and starts brainstorming how to get her and Elena back together for good press. When Maeve, who 1) is actually bisexual and thus has every right to sleep with men if she feels like it and 2) is still deeply depressed over the Elena situation, finally snaps at her to act human, Ashley seems genuinely guilty and quietly apologizes.
When Deep is forced to eat his octopus Timothy, who he can hear begging for his life, by a sadistic Homelander and his uncaring show wife, Ashley is the only person who appears to be uncomfortable with the situation, only remaining silent so Homelander won't kill her.
She viciously tears into A-Train for wanting "justice" against Blue Hawk, pointing out how much of A-Train’s own crimes have been swept under the rug and telling him to go fuck himself for only caring when he's wronged. Not just for the amount of work she put into bailing him out, but seemingly out of genuine moral outrage at his hypocrisy.
In the Gen V Season 1 finale, she is at a meeting with the Godolkin U. Board of Trustees to fill a vacant spot in The Seven. One objects to Andre, claiming his skin photographs are too dark. She calls him a "racist shit".
In Season 4 she's almost crying when Homelander murders Anika.
When she believes that ‘Webweaver’ is in genuine distress during their kink/fetish scene, she starts to back off.
She clearly can't believe her own eyes when she's watching Vought propaganda hidden as Christmas special.
Evil Redhead: Well, ginger, but she serves as one of the show's major antagonists, becoming more prominent character over the course of the series.
The Fashionista: After being promoted as the new Senior Vice President of Hero Management at Vought, Ashley's sense of fashion changed a lot. She wears more diverse clothing than anyone in the show, and her costumes and dresses are always provocative and sophisticated.
Faux Affably Evil: Tries to act polite and professional, even though she rarely ever means it.
Gilded Cage: In Season 4 she's the CEO who's richly paid yet doesn't have to do her job anymore since Homelander gave all her duties to Sister Sage. However, she's still forced to stay in her position because Sage prefers to work in the shadows and she knows Homelander won't allow anyone to leave him.
Heel Realization: The penultimate episode has her realizing how the toxic and lethal workplace environment at Vought made her cutthroat and vicious enough to frame Cameron and use his death, and she encourages A-Train to flee while he has the chance; she, however, cannot, because she (likely correctly) fears that Homelander would make her pay severely for the betrayal.
Hidden Depths:
As revealed in Season 4, she studied at Vanderbilt University and, according to her, Disney was trying to recruit her. Surprisingly, Vought didn't crumble to pieces when she was in charge, so maybe she wasn't that useless after all.
A photo of a younger her in Florence reveals she used to be a liberal hippie, even wearing a Ché Guevara t-shirt.
Hidden Heart of Gold: Gold or silver, Ashely does have a heart beneath her temperament, stress and adherence to her job. Which is both buried under and made more evident in the wake of Homelander's barely tamed megalomania and Vought's overall corrupt work environment.
Hypocrite: In season 4 she chastises the Deep for calling a superheroine a Butter Face, yet instantly dismisses Hyperion as a potential Seven candidate on the basis that she's a "slutty cum rag", also ignoring that she herself slept her way through Barcelona.
Inadequate Inheritor: Stillwell was respected and feared by everyone, with only Homelander and Starlight successfully disobeying her orders. Ashley is a Butt-Monkey second only to the Deep (and eventually even he puts her in her place) and everyone, even the doorman at the Seven's meeting room barely listens to her until she starts screaming at them or threatening them.
Jerkass: While it's mostly her doing her job, she cares much less about morals than fame and making the heroes look good, and gets huffy when they don't adhere to the rules. Notable examples include her ranting and yelling at Starlight over her public appearance and antagonizing her when she goes off script and not getting names for publicity of an attempted rape, completely ignoring the fact that Starlight saved a person's life. In Season 2 she doesn't seem to have improved much, but still comes off as more sympathetic because appearing alongside Homelander does that to you.
Jerkass Has a Point:
As disdainful as she is towards Starlight, she was right to berate her on how foolish it was to beat up two thugs in her plain clothes in "Cherry". This leads to a video of her doing so leaking online and a high school alumnus recognizing her, effectively compromising her secret identity. She also calls her out for not getting the victim's name since, statistically, she isn't likely to come forward, hence leaving no witnesses, which gives the two men free range to accuse Starlight of unwarranted assault.
In season 3 she ends up giving A-Train both barrels over his hypocrisy and double standards. She's still a deeply unpleasant and morally questionable person herself who blows off an actual crime he’s genuinely trying to avenge, but she's absolutely correct in her verbal beatdown of him.
Kicked Upstairs:
In Season 2, she takes Stillwell's position in Vought. Homelander only gave her the job to fill a spot in the company and to ensure that his plans go the way he wants them to, with her merely being a puppet. Happens again in Season 3, where Homelander makes her CEO after ousting Edgar, but again solely as his proxy. It then happens again in Season 4, where Sage becomes the CEO and Ashley is little more than a go-fer, and Season 5 has it happen yet again, but this time, she's kicked to DC to be the Vice President and the (reluctant) liaison between Homelander and Sage and the government.
Knockout Gas: She and The Deep indirectly use it in Season 3 to knock Queen Maeve out in her cell.
Laser-Guided Karma: She booked Starlight's appearance at the Believe Expo. But between her and Vought's mistreatment of Starlight and forcing her into their constant scripts and demands, the superheroine had enough and revealed the truth of her frustrations on live TV, resulting in Ashley getting fired.
Mean Boss: While she's nowhere as bad as Homelander, Ashley is a very verbally abusive boss who chews out her staff for the smallest of mistakes and, at one point, even emulates Homelander's treatment of her,note  even before she was made CEO. In Season 3, when she's promoted to CEO, she's this by default of condoning Homelander and The Deep's ludicrous whims and not using her position to stop it, such as The Deep firing most of the surveillance team, and allowing Homelander to verbally intimidate a worker. This can be justified, as her constantly having to please a bunch of emotionally volatile Supes creates an environment that does not tolerate any slip-ups, and any of her staff's mistakes will reflect badly onto her, which opens her up to some very real danger.
Missing Mom: Her mother died of cancer when she was just 17.
My God, What Have I Done?: She eventually started to regret orchestrating Cameron Coleman's death, realising that she crossed a certain line in morality.
It's so easy to become a monster in here.
Nervous Wreck: Having to be the agent for a group of rude, narcissistic, cynical, or just plain psychotic "heroes" will do that to you. It's gotten so bad that by the end of Season 3, it's revealed that she wears a wig after losing so much of her hair from the stress.
Noodle Incident: Why exactly does she consider Hyperion to be a "slutty cum rag"?
No Social Skills: Despite being a professional PR hack, she's dreadfully bad at handling people and interacting with them. While at first it looks like a general joke aimed at people doing PR jobs, as the show goes on, it turns out to be simply part of her personality.
Offscreen Moment of Awesome: After her Painful Transformation and gaining Psychic Powers, Ashley somehow manages to escape the Vought International building off-screen before Homelander and the others enact The Purge in the fourth Season Finale, and then spends the year inbetween the fourth and fifth season becoming Vice President of America.
Painful Transformation: After taking a dose of Compound V out of desperation to avoid being executed, Ashley is last seen in pain as the effects cause her cranium to grow.
Personality Powers: After injecting herself with Compound V to save herself from the purge, she gains the power to read minds. This reflects her fear of Homelander and her job as his advisor because she's always trying to predict what Homelander will do and will say whatever appeases him at the moment.
Pet the Dog:
When Maeve calls her out for only thinking of PR after Elena dumps Maeve, Ashley backs off and apologizes.
While harsh about it, she quickly orders one of Vought's board to leave the room after the woman inadvertently pisses off Homelander.
She knows that Queen Maeve is alive and survived her sacrifice to stop Soldier Boy, but she, for once, decides to take the moral high ground and delete the footage proving her survival, ensuring that Maeve can have the quiet, happy life that she wanted.
In Season 4, she bonded with A-Train and eventually saved his life by framing Cameron Coleman as The Mole. Afterwards, she decided to allow him to escape from Homelander and advised him to take out his tracking trip.
Politically Incorrect Villain: Mainly on a pragmatic and tone deaf level.
In "Barbary Coast", she's reluctant to have Silver Kincaid picked for the Seven since she believes she's from Afghanistan, even though it says point-blank on the selection board that she's from England.
She insists on publicizing Maeve as gay even though she's actually bi.
She's over the moon with joy at the prospect of making a movie that accredits all of A-Train's accomplishments to a fictional Mighty Whitey track coach, even though he was trained by his brother.
In Gen V, she dismisses Jordan as a "bigender Asian with pronoun fuckery" and says that they can't be ranked among the top students of Godolkin University because they won't test well in "Dallas and Ft. Lauderdale".
Powerful People Are Subs: Inverted. As the nominal CEO of Vought she is ostensibly powerful, but in reality, she is a puppet for the increasingly unstable Homelander and is effectively trapped in a Gilded Cage, while she is very dominant in her sexual relationships.
Pretty Fly for a White Guy: Shows shades of this when interacting with A-Train, though given she's a white lady doing publicity for a billion-dollar corporation, her grasp on Black culture and current slang is painfully bad.
Professional Butt-Kisser: Was getting ready to be this when replacing Stillwell in Season 2. When she tries to make small talk about how bad the old office design was, Homelander quips how he liked it, causing her to quickly agree.
Psychic Powers: Her injection of Compound V gave her these as of Season 5 - unfortunately, they manage to manifest themselves as a sentient tumour on the back of her head who's more or less Ashley's buried empathetic side that tries to get her to take the more moral path.
Puppet Queen: Is named CEO of Vought after Homelander deposes Edgar, but it's clear that Homelander is really running the show. When Starlight urges her to stand up to him, Ashley's facade briefly breaks and she tearfully whispers that she can't do anything, before quickly hardening and kicking her out. Then she loses what little remaining clout she had when Homelander brings in Sister Sage to run things instead. She later gets promoted to be the Vice President under Calhoun once she becomes a Supe, but it's clear that she's still a figurehead and essentially meant to be the Supe representative in the Calhoun (read: Homelander) administration.
Really Gets Around: She states that during her time in Catalonia she "tinder'd her way through Barcelona".
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: After A-Train blows up at her for not doing anything about Blue Hawk attacking a crowd of black people, including A-Train's brother, Ashley turns it around on him and calls him out as a Hypocrite and an Ungrateful Bastard, pointing out that he's committed several crimes over the years (including several murders, like Popclaw) that she and Vought have covered up, and that the only reason he gives a damn about this is because it actually affected him. She caps it off by furiously telling him to go fuck himself, and he quietly leaves.
Redemption Rejection: In Season 4, during "The Insider" episode, Ashley finally gets to leave Vought when A-Train has to go into hiding after he reveals he's the leaker after saving the Boys from Black Noir and the Deep and offers to take Ashley with him. However, Ashley decides she can't, likely out of fear that Homelander will find her no matter where she hides, as well as the guilt of how low she sank after framing Coleman as a traitor.
Sadist: To a much lesser extent than the likes of Homelander, but as the series goes on it is shown that Ashley has grown a bit of a sadistic streak. Besides having a BDSM affair with Cameron Coleman starting in Season 3, she also gets weirdly enthusiastic about Homelander forcing the Deep to give oral sex to A-Train, which is a near Rape by Proxy experience for both men. Later on, she ends up getting involved in a sexual event with Tek Knight and Hughie disguised as Webweaver where she takes great delight in taking part within the disgusting sequence.
Sex for Solace: She mentions that after being fired in Season 1, she had a breakdown and decided to travel to Barcelona, where she "let everyone eat [her] paella". Including a guy with elephantiasis! She also starts having more extreme sex as the series goes on, with her starting a BDSM relationship with Cameron Coleman in Season 3.
She Knows Too Much: When Ashley is tasked by Homelander to compile a kill list of everyone who knows compromising information about him, it never occurs to her that she could end up on the list herself. When The Deep suggests she should be at the top for knowing the most, Homelander immediately approves without a second thought. Luckily, Ashley overhears their conversation and takes Compound V to protect herself, narrowly saving her own life.
Sole Survivor: She is the only Vought employee with any (and by that it means a lot of) compromising information on Homelander and the Seven by the end of Season 4 after Homelander orders nearly half of the staff to be executed.
Teeth-Clenched Teamwork: With A-Train in Season 4. They both are scared of Homelander, hate Sage, and effectively blackmail each other into helping themselves, because they're already so much Trapped in Villainy. She even manages to save his life by framing Cameron Coleman into the data leak.
The Social Expert: She's the official publicist of The Seven.
The Team Normal: She's effectively, if unofficially, a part of the Seven, being regularly present and involved in their meetings, at least until Season 4, where she is de facto demoted and replaced by Sage. Until Season 5, where she's successfully survived her V injection and become a Supe.
Took a Level in Badass: She becomes a Supe in Season 5, having gained Psychic Powers and the ability to read minds - except for Sage's, for some reason.
Tragic Villain: You can't help but feel sorry for her every time she's bullied by super-powered beings who can kill her wherever they want.
Trapped in Villainy: She is basically forced to be Vought's CEO by Homelander. In season 4, she wants to quit after being treated like dirt for so long, but after seeing Homelander laser Anika, she realizes he will never let her go. On another level, while Ashley is a legitimately awful person, at least some of her terribleness comes from her trying to placate Homelander's ego - best exemplified when she insults and fires Maureen after she inadvertently pisses off Homelander, humiliating her but also preventing her from being lasered in half.
Surrounded by Idiots: She is constantly frustrated by the idiocy of the Deep and A-Train, whose actions she has to cover up for the sake of Vought's publicity.
Uncertain Doom: Downplayed. In the fourth Season Finale, Ashley is last seen undergoing a Painful Transformation after taking Compound V out of desperation for survival. While it's heavily implied that she managed to escape the company purge enacted by Homelander, it's unknown if her new Supe physiology is capable of functioning well or just enough to be able to avoid danger. The final season reveals that she manages to escape Vought International off-screen before the purge takes place, thanks to her newly awakened Psychic Powers.
Villain Has a Point: When she told A-Train to his face that he was a Hypocrite. While her defending Blue Hawk's image and covering his crimes is wrong, A-Train has been doing much worse without a care in the world and killed his own lover to avoid trouble.
Woman Scorned: Cameron Coleman dumps her in Season 4 after she became Authority in Name Only. She responds by framing him into data leak, resulting in his death on the hands of The Seven.