0% Approval Rating: By the penultimate episode of season 3, Butcher's hypocrisy, lack of gratitude, and generally Jerkassery have made every member of his team hate him, with the notable exception of Hughie. Marvin is outright considering killing Butcher because he views the man as an unstable loose cannon who is a threat to himself and those around him. He even loses Hughie's trust later on after brutally killing Neuman and stealing the Supe Virus.
10-Minute Retirement: Butcher is actually ready to work within the system or even bow out entirely of keeping a leash on supes at the start of Season 3. It's only when Hughie reveals that Neuman is a Supe (and Stan Edgar's adoptive daughter, no less) and admits that Butcher was right that Billy decides to get back into the game.
Abusive Parents: It's revealed that Butcher and his younger brother, Lenny, were horrifically abused by their father. The abuse deeply scarred both of them on an emotional level, and Lenny was eventually Driven to Suicide. It affects even his bond with Ryan, pushing the boy away out of fear that he will bring him down with him.
The Alcoholic: He used to consume considerable amounts of alcohol, but went sober since Becca's death.
All for Nothing:
His vigilante crusade against the Supes started with him believing that Homelander murdered his wife, Becca. By the end of Season 1, we find out that Becca is actually still alive, meaning his violent crusade was based on a lie. Season 2 is devoted to him trying to rescue her… only for her to die at the end, anyway.
The end of Season 3 is this for him again. Butcher spent most of the season trying to find something that can kill Homelander and he found it in the form of Soldier Boy. But after all the multiple deaths Soldier Boy is responsible for and betraying the trust of the Boys, Soldier Boy was prevented from killing Homelander because Ryan got involved and Butcher didn't want him hurt so he gives up on the idea of using Soldier Boy. To add insult to injury, Butcher taking too many Temp V ends up giving him 12-18 months to live and he loses Ryan to Homelander who starts to embrace Homelander's way of thinking. Basically, he ended up losing a lot and gained nothing meaningful in return.
Alliterative Name: Billy Butcher.
All Take and No Give: Butcher's relationship with the rest of the team is this to a tee. While deep down he respects them (sort of), he leads the team with an iron fist and prioritizes his goals and wants over those of the others and expects them to be okay with it even to the point that he left the others to the mercy of Vought to go after Homelander in Season 1 and immediately tried to sell Kimiko's brother out in Season 2. This comes to a head in Season 3 when this exact behavior ruins his relationship with both Frenchie and Marvin.
Kimiko: [though text] I'm not your fucking gun.
Butcher: That is exactly what you are. In case any of you have forgotten how this works, when I tell you to do something, you fucking do it.
Alternate Company Equivalent:
Of The Punisher, especially the live-action versions of Frank Castle. It's also not surprising as Garth Ennis cites Frank Castle as one of his favorite comic book characters and has written the character himself in a couple of stories.
By the end of the 4th season, he become a composite of the Earth-92164 version of Frank Castle and Sony films' version of Eddie Brock, especially after accepting "Kessler", a superpowered, sentient brain cancer.
Animal Motif: Downplayed, when meeting Hughie for the first time there is a documentary on lions playing in the background, reflecting his authority over The Boys and his psychotic, predatory nature towards supes. Since a lion is the national animal of England, it serves as another reminder of his nationality.
Anti-Hero: Butcher is a man driven by vengeance against Homelander, with no qualms about collateral victims. On the same day, most of the Supes and people he went against were much worse than him, lacking any sort of morality.
Arch-Enemy: As of the Season 2 finale, Homelander finally regards Butcher as such. The two look forward to the day when one of them kills the other in glorious battle.
At Least I Admit It: Butcher is not a nice man by any means and has no issue doing questionable things if it serves his greater goals but he is always open about what kind of person he is and is always straight with people he deals with, never putting on a fake persona or trying to bullshit himself or anyone else about who he is like Homelander.
Awful Truth: Joe Kessler being just an hallucination is this for Butcher because it causes him to remember that he is responsible for his death, after leaving him for dead in the Panjshir Valley in their last mission together. "Kessler" also points out to Butcher that he is not as devoted Becca as he believes himself to be, asking why he cheated on her with a waitress.
Ax-Crazy: According to Becca, he's always been full of rage and homicidally violent to the point that he's "one bad day from pounding someone to death in the parking lot". While she does later take this back and apologize, Season 3 sees Billy beat Gunpowder to death in a parking lot, starting another downward spiral of his.
Badass Boast: He tells Homelander, the World's Strongest Man, that he's going to hit him where it hurts by taking away his loved ones right to his face without a hint of fear. While his timing is off by one season finale, he ultimately proves he's as good as his word.
Badass Longcoat: Like his comic counterpart, Billy rocks one. Notably, he's the only one to keep it from the comics. It's also noticeably shorter, only reaching about his knees instead of his ankles.
Badass Normal: In a world where people with superpowers are common and known, Billy has no powers of his own but makes up for it by being an experienced hand to hand fighter who's beaten much more powerful Supes before (like Translucent). This ends up working to his advantage when he gets Supe powers of his own, as he easily trounces the Unskilled, but Strong Homelander in a close up fight now that he has an even playing field in terms of strength and durability.
Beam-O-War: Has this with Homelander in Season 3 Episode 6. It's unclear whose heat vision is more powerful, as they seem evenly matched, although Homelander has more control over his due to living with his powers much longer than Butcher.
Beard of Sorrow: Grew his beard after Becca disappeared and he learned that Homelander had raped her.
Berserk Button:
He does not like it if you suggest that the Supes are "gods" or in any way stand above other people.
He seriously doesn't like being compared to Homelander.
He really hates when victims of Supes make excuses for them or give them undeserved leeway, viciously chewing out a support group for doing so.
Reminding Butcher of his wife Becca is a bad idea. Hughie rightly calling Butcher out on the bullshit of his "I'm doing this for Becca" justification for his all-consuming and toxic vendetta against Supes causes both M.M. and Frenchie to shit bricks in a way which implies that if anyone else had said that in Hughie's place, they would've met a very nasty retribution.
Big Bad Ensemble: By the end of Season 4, becomes this after Face–Heel Turn. While Homelander and his newly founded Super Supremacist dictatorship are taking over America, Butcher abandons the team and takes the Shetty Virus in order to wipe out all Supes in the world, officially becoming a threat on par with Homelander.
Big Bad Slippage: Unlike in the comics, this version of Butcher, while still loathing supes for understandable reasons, doesn't start out with genocidal intentions. Instead, he's slowly pushed further and further to the dark side through a mix of losing his wife, being tormented by an Enemy Within, witnessing Homelander take over the country, and finally losing all hope after seeing Ryan kill one of his closest allies (seemingly) without remorse. It's only then that Butcher finally decides to wipe out all supes, believing it to be the only way to end all the horrors that Vought has caused.
Big Brother Instinct: Towards Hughie; it's elaborated on in Season 2 when interacting with his aunt, who infers that Hughie is a lot like Billy's late younger brother, whom Billy was violently protective of.
Black-and-Gray Morality: Butcher never pretends to be something else than he is, a drunken Knight Templar with a deep hatred for Supes, willing to do anything to take them down. Mallory hired him to do the dirty job in the past, helping him to get away with everything. He still comes better off than his Foil, Homelander, who is a complete monster, beyond any redemption.
Blatant Lies: To get M.M. to join him, Butcher claims that he hasn't contacted the 'French whore' in years... Except Butcher sought out Frenchie first (he lies with such a smiling face that M.M. doesn't fully believe him anyway).
Blood Knight: It’s quite clear that Billy gets pleasure from violence in his crusade against Supes, with him constantly displaying excited and sadistic smiles, although he’s a rather deconstructed example with his violent tendencies frequently disturbing and isolating his teammates.
Bloody Smile: Flashes ones in his fights against Transluscent and Homelander.
Body Horror: Downplayed but after becoming terminal from Temp V, something is crawling around under his skin. "Wisdom of the Ages" has the skin-crawling becoming more prominent as Ezekiel gets closer to successfully strangling Butcher to death....before Smash to Black results in Butcher waking up absolutely covered in gore from Ezekiel's shredded remains and no memory of what happened. By the episode's end, Butcher admits off-handedly to Hughie that he tried to treat his Temp V-induced terminal cancer with a dose of the permanent Compound V, only for it to seemingly have no effect. What he doesn't realize at the time is that it did work... on the cancer, granting it superpowers along with a will of its own. The empowered cancer manifests as Joe Kessler, who also embodies all of Butcher's worst impulses, in Butcher's mind.
Boomerang Bigot: Becomes this to Supes in Season 3 after he takes Temp V for the first time to get information from Gunpowder, then beats him to death for being a Supe.
Boots of Toughness: Butcher always wears boots, which are visibly old and outworn, befitting his job.
Break His Heart to Save Him: Bill has a habit of doing this to people he cares about, owing to his awareness that people he gets close to tend to die. In Season 3, Butcher tells Ryan he hates him for what he did to Becca in order to keep the boy at distance for his own safety, even if he visibly regrets how he went about it. It's deconstructed in the season finale, as this action causes Ryan to turn against him and join Homelander, putting the boy on the path to being corrupted and rendering all of Becca's actions pointless. Additionally, he knocks out Hughie just before he gets ready for the final leg of the journey to Vought Tower after it becomes clear that Hughie will probably kill himself through Compound V overdose, a fate Butcher is only happy inflicting on himself. Season 4 ends up deconstructing this, as his tendency to push others away when he is going down a dark path means that Butcher doesn't have anyone who is willing to stand with him once he starts making sincere efforts to try and be a better person. It also means that he has no one to talk with about his Compound-V enhanced cancer, which is actively trying to make him give in to his worst impulses. The season finale sees him finally admit defeat to Kessler, the embodiment of said cancer, after Ryan accidentally kills Mallory, the last person to trust Butcher unconditionally.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: His decision to leave Ryan with Mallory is this — Billy is well aware that neither he, Homelander, nor Vought can remotely provide a happy childhood to Ryan, so Billy leaves the boy with Mallory, ensuring that he will have a greater chance of growing up to be a better person than either his biological or adoptive fathers.
Breath Weapon: An involuntary implied example that's Played for Horror. While we don't see how Kessler emerges from Butcher to kill Ezekiel, it's possible that he came out of Butcher's mouth as seen beneath the skin of the latter's forehead just before the Smash to Black.
Broken Pedestal:
Butcher is basically a deconstruction of this trope. At various points in the story, Butcher will do something to alienate at least one of the boys into hating him and seriously considering leaving. The deconstruction comes in due to the fact that all of them know what kind of person Butcher is, it just they either believe that there is more to him or that he is at least a manageable Jerkass. When confronted with the truth, they will be blisteringly mad at him, but acknowledge that they shouldn't expect better from him. Fortunately (or unfortunately), Butcher will either hit them with enough kind words or good points that they come back around to his side.
Seems to have broken for real for both Frenchie and M.M. in season 3. For Frenchie, it's when Butcher very definitively tells Kimiko that she is a gun to him and that when he tells both her and Frenchie to do something, they do it (no diffrent than Shining Light or Little Nina treated them). For M.M., it's when Butcher teams up with Soldier Boy. Even if deep down Marvin knows that he can't stop Soldier Boy, Butcher still knows how he feels about Soldier Boy. That Butcher would still do so despite knowing that, Marvin feels so betrayed that he is implies that he is willing to kill Butcher now. Ultimately, they decide to work together again, but it is clear Butcher is now on thin ice.
Brutal Honesty: Butcher is always up front about his feelings on everything and everyone around him and never sugarcoats the blunt facts or try to hide what kind of person he is and what he does. The flipside is that this also means the moments of kindness and respect he shows are completely sincere.
The Bully: In season 2, Annie reads him down and tells him his Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse for how he behaves saying he’s nothing more than a bigot and a bully.
The Butcher: It's literally his last name. And as a psychotic Anti-Hero bordering on Nominal Hero who has a violent hatred toward Supes and is perfectly willing to act on it, he lives up the reputation that name has.
Byronic Hero: Billy is a violent Vigilante Man, with a jaded look in life, who struggles a lot with own personal integrity. On one hand, he genuinely tries to be a better person and a good father figure to Ryan, loathes himself for being immoral and violent, but at the same time he knows this is his very nature. Butcher recognizes that the Supes are people just as much everyone else, but he is still determined to take them down, even if it means breaking the law and manipulating people he cares about. It also helps that he is an attractive man wearing a Badass Longcoat.
Card-Carrying Jerkass: Butcher is rude, foul-mouthed, and treats everyone around him like tools to further his goals, but he's completely open and honest about it.
Cartwright Curse:
First, his wife Becca, disappears for 8 years, and when he is finally reunited with her she dies being accidentally killed by her own son.
He had a short fling in the past with Susan Reynor. She is killed by Victoria Neuman.
And finally, Queen Maeve. She was kidnapped and held prisoner by Homelander only because Homelander smelled Butcher's scent on her. Luckily, she survives her next encounter with Homelander, albeit with heavy injuries.
Catchphrase: "(Fucking) diabolical" and especially the word "Cunt", which he says 40 times in the first two seasons alone, an average of two and a half per episode.
As well as the phrase "Don't be a cunt". Not only does he say it to Hughie in the very first episode, he also uses it as his screen name in a video game and, in the penultimate episode of Season 4, sends Ryan a Christmas present from "Don T. Beakunt". Ryan picks up on who it's from immediately.
Catchphrase Insult: He can hardly go a sentence without saying "cunt" or "twat". This is also incorporated into a misnomer in one of Ryan’s Christmas gifts, which the boy recognizes is from Butcher.
Celibate Hero: In the 8 years Becca went missing, Butcher had only a short fling with Susan Raynor in the past. Later in Season 3, he is having Sex for Solace with Maeve, but he doesn't seem otherwise romantically interested in her.
Characterization Marches On: While his general personality and motivations change due to Character Development, after the first season the writers notably stop putting Butcher in situations where he would kill an innocent person. There are even times where he tries to defuse the situation, like when him and Starlight are confronted by a Sage Grove patient and Butcher tries to dissuade him from attacking, and only shoots him after the patient attacks and nearly kill Hughie. Later in that same episode, it seems like Butcher is going to shoot a man to steal his car, but Starlight ends up killing him instead. This is pretty much the last time anything like this happens, and after this his actions can be considered overkill, but the people he kills (for example Gunpowder) definitely deserve it. This was probably done due to him nearly killing Stillwell's infant son at the end of season one, and if they continued putting him in situations like this, it would become impossible to sympathize with him or justify his team not killing him.
Character Tics: Butcher cocks his body while standing up a lot, almost as if trying to find balance.
Charles Atlas Superpower: He took some serious blows from Translucent who is a bulletproof Supe with Super-Strength, and wasn't very affected. In fact, he was capable of returning the blows. Even being riddled with cancer is not enough to prevent Butcher from outright impaling Splinter's head with a crowbar using one hand.
Chest Blaster: Played for Horror. In the 4th Season Finale, he's capable of unleashing "Kessler" through his chest after agreeing to unleash a Supe genocide.
Cold Sniper: Butcher owns a semi-automatic .50-caliber sniper rifle and is very good with his shot.
Combat Pragmatist: Butcher is a skilled and smart combatant, as seen when he spits his own blood on Translucent so he could see him which allowed him to effectively fight back.
Combat Tentacles: His V-empowered cancer gives him these, which burst out of his chest and are strong enough to rip the almost indestructible Victoria Neuman in half with ease.
The Corrupter: To Hughie, as he sees him as a valuable, like-minded ally in his quest against Homelander and tries to push him into following the same path.
The Corruption: Butcher's brain tumor not only is slowly killing him but also impairs his judgement by making Butcher hallucinate Becca and Joe Kessler acting like a good angel, bad angel duo, with the implication that Joe won the battle.
Crowbar Combatant: His melee weapon of choice. He even makes sure to have it packed with him whenever he heads out.
Crusading Widower: He wants to avenge the loss of his wife, Becca, by taking out Homelander and any other supe that crosses his path. Although this is subverted when it turns out Becca is alive. Ironically inverted in the Season 2 finale where Becca's actual death lead to Billy temporarily considering to take a calmer path in life due to her dying promise.
Cynicism Catalyst: While Butcher was always rageful, he was also jovial and happy before Becca's disappearance. After, he lost his will to enjoy life and dedicated himself to avenge her.
Deadpan Snarker: He is dark-humored and has a foul mouth.
Butcher: Well, well, well, if it ain't the Invisible Cunt.
Dead Person Conversation: Season 4 reveals that the tumors caused by Temp V have been causing him to hallucinate Becca and talking to him. Later, it's revealed the Joe Kessler is also a hallucination acting on Butcher's worst impulses.
Death Seeker: There's heavy implications that Billy lost his will to live after Becca disappeared, with nothing left to live for except his hatred. In the Season 1 finale, he initiates a Suicide Attack on Homelander with a smile on his face. This gets worse in Season 2 where, after finding out Becca is alive, she ultimately chooses her son's safety over him, causing him to make a last goodbye to Hughie before trying to commit Suicide-by-Black Noir. He's inspired to keep on living when he sees Hughie and the others are liable to be killed alongside him. He might have become this by the end of Season 4, when he gives into Kessler's goal of genocide of all the Supes, which Billy technically is due to Kessler's existence, possibly counting himself among the Supes that need to go.
Decomposite Character: Ever so zigzagged. Butcher still possesses fantastic racism towards supes after what Homelander did to Rebecca. However, he has a soft spot for Rebecca’s son Ryan and a few others. It’s also not kill on sight anytime he sees a supe. All in all, he doesn’t want to kill all of them. However, Joe Kessler, who possesses all of those negative traits from Butcher's comic counterpart, is an alternate personality manifested by his tumor and can act through Butcher. So his characterization both is and isn’t loyal to the source material.
Despair Event Horizon: After Ryan kills Grace, The Butcher finally embraces "Joe Kessler"'s desire to kill all supes. He killed Neumann first and took the virus, which shows his intentions.
Deuteragonist: Over the course of the first two seasons, Butcher obtains the same screentime that the protagonist Hughie has, with his plot involving his revenge against Homelander and the tragic past involving his wife.
The Dreaded: When he starts reconnecting with the Boys in Season 1, they want nothing to do with him due to his reputation as a loose cannon. And when Hughie openly criticizes Butcher's attachment to Becca in front of the team, they all collectively shit their pants. Mesmer and Vogelbaum become terrified of him after they realize the lengths he will go to just to get what he wants. Even Homelander is noticeably worried after he learns that Butcher got access to Compound V and teamed up with Soldier Boy. Even Becca admits to being scared of Billy and avoided telling him about being raped as a result. This is taken to its fullest in Season 4, with Vought trying to keep the Compound V virus away from Billy out of fear of what he’d do with it.
DreamWorks Face: His default expression. Butcher will smirk and raise his eyebrow every time he has a crazy idea, and he has them all the time.
Elites Are More Glamorous: Played with. Billy is ex-SAS operator, and is certainly badass, but he's ultimately a human going up against superpowered people. His military past is more about explaining his general attitude, rather than give him opportunities for ass-kicking, and certain references paint his past as less than glamorous and more ruthless and immoral.
Empowered Badass Normal: In Season 3, V-24 grants Butcher Super-Strength, bullet-proof skin and Eye Beams for the duration, at the cost of eventually causing terminal brain cancer. Season 4 eventually reveals that he's still this after a fashion, albeit, not directly. In his attempts to treat the Temp V-induced brain cancer with regular Compound V, Billy unintentionally empowered the cancer, giving it superpowers and sapience, allowing it to appear before him as a hallucination of his old deceased colleague Joe Kessler. When Butcher embraces the help of the hallucination, it manifests as powerful tentacles which burst from his chest and are strong enough to tear apart even fairly tough Supes with little effort.
Enemy Mine:
Forms a deal with Soldier Boy, despite being the one who murdered M.M.'s family, just to take down Homelander.
Later in the same season, he saves Homelander after Soldier Boy harms Ryan, leading to them aiding each other in attacking the veteran.
Establishing Character Moment: He introduces himself as a fake FBI agent to Hughie to try and recruit him to take down the Supes when they get out of line. He makes no secret about how much he hates the Supes in the first minutes he is introduced.
Everyone Has Standards: Zigzagged. When he learns that the Supe virus could cause a genocide of all Supes if it’s made strong enough to kill Homelander, he’s horrified and doesn’t want to go through with it. However, Joe Kessler, a manifestation of Butcher’s worst impulses, encourages him to, meaning that there’s a little part of Butcher that wants to kill them all. However, once he realizes the urge to go through with it is there, Butcher immediately tells the other Boys to keep himself from going rogue, even bringing a reluctant and recently imprisoned Frenchie on board to find a way to modify it so it won't go airborne, declaring they would only need to use it on Homelander and Neuman.
Evil Brit: He is from the UK and plays the Nominal Hero role in the US. Downplayed because, as Ax-Crazy he may be, Butcher is much more sympathetic and has a moral compass as well as a greater capacity for guilt.
Evil Versus Evil: Due to the hallucination of Joe Kessler bringing out his darker impulses, at the end of Season 4, Butcher goes rogue and decides to cause absolute genocide against all Supes in the world and is in direct opposition to Homelander, the leader of a Super Supremacist dictatorship.
Eye Beams: He gains these after taking V24, which are capable of matching Homelander in a Beam-O-War.
Face–Heel Turn: After spending the entire series toeing the line between good and evil, Butcher finally crosses it at the end of Season 4 by brutally ripping Victoria Neuman apart in front of her own daughter and stealing the supe-killing virus to enact a Final Solution..
Fallen Hero: Granted, Butcher was never the most heroic chip of the block, but by the end of Season 4 he has truly fallen to the dark side by abandoning the Boys in order to enact a genocidal plan to eliminate all Supes in the world after Ryan accidentally kills Mallory.
Fantastic Racism: He really hates Supes. While it is true that many Supes are corrupt, egotistical, or even downright evil, Billy paints them all with the same brush. He's irrationally hostile and suspicious towards Kimiko and Starlight, who have done nothing to earn it other than having superpowers. He even shows a lack of concern over potentially harming a super-abled baby. On the whole, Billy does not seem to see Supes as human, but rather as monsters who are evil by nature. He's making some (admittedly small) steps to move past this, and at the end of Season 2 chooses to treat Ryan as a person, even giving the boy his only remaining memento of Becca. Season 3 shows he's making good progress, but risks sliding back when he goes on the warpath against Homelander again. Said season also reveals the real reason he hates Supes — not because they have powers, but rather because they can do practically anything they want and get away with it. He also admits he thinks this is a problem with all humans, but that powers just make it worse.
Fatal Flaw:
His hatred for Supes (especially Homelander), to the point of letting it consume him and cloud his judgment. He finds decisive evidence against Vought's schemes, but does not give it to the CIA because they can't guarantee they'll prosecute Homelander. By the time he's convinced to cooperate, it's too late as the Supe terrorists have appeared, forcing the government to cover up Vought's crimes and sign the military bill to combat the new threat.
Season 2 elaborates on this. His racism against Supes seems to be an extension of his inherently violent nature. Becca refuses to go with him because she's afraid he will do something bad to Ryan and destroy himself in pursuit of revenge, and implies it was inevitable that she would break up with him because she did not know how to save him from himself.
Season 3 adds in his willingness to push others away so they don't get hurt. While Billy means well (Butcher is aware of both how toxic he is and how people close to him tend to die, and wants to avoid sending his friends to their deaths — at least intentionally), his habit of being a complete asshole to others to drive them away from him means that they gradually lose their ability to trust him at all. This leads to Ryan choosing to side with Homelander after the latter tells the boy that Becca's death wasn't his fault (Billy had previously lied and stated that he blamed Ryan for Becca's death so that the boy wouldn't try to follow him on his quest to kill Homelander), and puts him on very thin ice with all of the Boys except for Hughie, who Took a Level in Cynic and, as a side effect, finally noticed Butcher's Hidden Heart of Gold. And even then, Hughie agrees that the rest of the team has valid reasons to hate Butcher. This ends up being a problem for everyone at the end of Season 4 when Ryan accidentally kills Mallory - having pushed away everyone else who cared for him, Butcher seems to accept that taking the high-road just won't work and finally gives in to his darker impulses to go ahead with Supe genocide.
Faux Affably Evil: After finally giving into Kessler at the end of Season 4, Butcher nonchalantly rips Victoria Neuman apart, then calmly steals the supe virus from Frenchie while threatening him. His final words to his former team after doing all of that firmly cement him as this trope:
Butcher: Oh, by the way… (smirks) you're all fucking welcome.
Final Solution: In Season 4, he discovers the secret existence of a virus that can kill supes, and with Kessler's influence plans to use it on every supe to make sure he gets Homelander.
Foil:
He's one to Homelander - both are the leaders of their respective teams, but while Homelander puts on a façade of friendliness while he's actually a horrible person, Butcher does the opposite, hiding good intentions underneath a gruff, antagonistic exterior. Their upbringings involving a controlling and abusive father pushing them into fitting their respective ideals further drives this point. The big difference between the two is that Butcher is capable of recognizing his flaws and making progress in moving past them. Homelander, meanwhile, does not recognize that most of his problems are entirely due to his own flaws and thus is unable to move past them. This comes to a head in Season 3, as while Homelander's toxic personality forces away everyone who isn't cowering in fear of him, Billy has made a partnership with Soldier Boy and earned Hughie's Undying Loyalty to the point that Hughie is willing to sacrifice himself to help Butcher kill Homelander, despite Butcher wanting Hughie to save himself.
Starlight: Underneath all that swagger, you're just a bigot and a bully. I know another guy just like that; he's got a flag for a cape.
Later revelations also make him one to Black Noir. Both were horribly abused by a male figure of authority in their lives (Butcher had his father, Noir had Soldier Boy) who also bullied others. This lead to them becoming gruff and standoffish later in life, and also set them down violent paths (Black Noir became Stan Edgar's hitman, Butcher joined the British Army and later the SAS), while still retaining immense emotional scars from it. Other than that, though, the two could not be more different — Butcher is an attractive man while Black Noir bears horrific scars from when he fought Soldier Boy. Butcher is loud and obnoxious while Noir is mute due to his injuries. Butcher is the leader of his team while Earving is content to follow others. Butcher is absolutely determined to kill Homelander despite the extreme odds against him while Noir is absolutely terrified of facing Soldier Boy again and runs rather than fight. Finally, there are two major, interconnected differences between the two: Black Noir and Butcher are relatively isolated among their teams due to Black Noir being mute and asocial while Billy is an ass. Butcher, however, still manages to bond with Hughie, who is slowly managing to keep him from going too far. Black Noir, meanwhile, has to get a pep-talk from his own hallucinations to realize that You Are Better Than You Think You Are and muster the courage to face Soldier Boy.
Freudian Excuse: He grew up with a very abusive father who had quite the monstrous sink or swim mentality, resulting in Butcher's younger brother, Lenny, killing himself. And this is not even mentioning what happens to his wife.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: While his family still empathizes with him, Hughie and Becca have both made it clear that regardless of how bad Butcher had it, his behavior is toxic and causes significant harm to innocents and Butcher needs to grow up, get his anger under control, and stop using others as excuses for his problems. To Billy's credit, he actually makes improvements in this regard, even if they are small.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Downplayed, but Billy's bitter, abrasive personality and myopic obsession with revenge are frequently criticized by his comrades, especially because of his tendency to leave them by the wayside as a result.
From Bad to Worse: In Season 4, he injects himself with Compund V in an attempt to cure his cancer. It results in a superpowered, sentient cancer mass that's infinitely more dangerous than Butcher could ever be.
From Camouflage to Criminal: He's a former soldier, from the S.A.S. Special Forces in the British Army.
God Is Evil: Discussed. Butcher argues to a Christian at the Believe Expo that assuming God exists he's cruel and hates humanity given how much suffering the world has.
Butcher: I'm saying if there is some geezer up there with a big white beard, he's a world heavyweight cunt! Yeah, he's got a hard-on for mass murder and giving kids cancer and his big old answer to the existential clusterfuck that is humanity is to nail his own bleeding son to a plank. That is a cunt move! Come on, even you've got to agree with me there. We should lob a fucking nuke at him, get it over and done with, you know what I'm saying? [Beat] All right, good talk. Think about it. I'm here all day, alright?
Good Angel, Bad Angel: The hallucinations of Becca and Joe Kessler play these roles for Butcher. Becca wants Butcher to prioritize saving Ryan from Homelander and keep his humanity, while Joe encourages him to give into his darkest impulses and kill all Supes like initially planned. At the end of Season 4 Kessler wins and corrupts Butcher into wiping out all Supes.
Good Stepfather: He had no intention of being this, but he ends up being the figure that gives Ryan his freedom, and a new moral compass. Butcher doesn't like the fact that Ryan exists or that Becca would give up everything to protect the Child by Rape that tore her away from her husband, but he made a promise to Becca that he would care for Ryan, who is technically his stepson. As soon as they're out of Homelander's range of attack, he sets Ryan up with Mallory, knowing she's a better influence than he is and implicitly promises to check up on him.
He also decides not to immediately force Ryan away from Homelander, knowing that his Anger Born of Worry pushed him towards his biological father; instead, Butcher lets Ryan decide to defect on his own as soon as possible. Unfortunately, it seems to be subverted by the Season 4 finale, after Ryan then kills Mallory by accident and then quietly exits, thus completely breaking Butcher's trust in him and agree to help "Kessler", seizing the Supe Virus from the Boys to kill all the Supes which would no doubt include Ryan.
Grin of Audacity: Billy flashes an excited grin during his brawl with Homelander in "Herogasm".
Hallucinations: In season 4 he starts to hallucinate Becca. Strangely enough, he hallucinates her with dyed hair despite her having brunet hair when she died. Joe Kessler is also a hallucination but one used by the cancer in Butcher to communicate.
Happily Married: He had a happy life with Becca until her disappearance.
Hates Their Parent: He always resented his father for how he treated him and Lenny and couldn't care less that he has cancer.
Heel Realization: Has one in Season 3 after taking some Temp V himself, where he recognizes to Maeve that just having superpowers doesn't automatically makes someone evil. In Season 4, Butcher admits to Ryan that he thinks of himself as a bad person and only wishes to make amends before he passes away from his cancer. He also openly struggles with his inner darkness in the form of his hallucinations of Joe Kessler.
Heroes' Frontier Step: Butcher gets a couple in Season 2, the first when he lets Kenji go to save Hughie, and the second is in the finale when he doesn't carry out his plan to hand Ryan over to Vought, and is shown willing to protect him in Becca's honor.
Heroic RRoD: Once the conflict at Vought Tower ends in the end of Season 3, Butcher collapses due to the effects of his recent V24 injection expiring, as well as because of his abuse of it in the recent days.
He Who Fights Monsters: He steadily gets worse and worse as he puts getting revenge on Supes above all else. Season 2 reveals this is actually subverted. Becca reveals that Billy has always been like this so rather than getting worse, Becca's disappearance merely returned him to who he was. Then Season 3 does this quite literally when Compound V24, a literal Superpower Lottery, gives him part of Homelander's powerset.
Hidden Depths: A rare negative example - Butcher mentions in Season 3 that he's had plenty of experience using a variety of drugs even prior to his first use of V24, including cocaine, MDMA, heroin, and meth. There are some other positive examples though, like his surprising knowledge of the Spice Girls due to his wife being a huge fan and the fact that he learned card magic to entertain his younger brother. He’s also shown repeatedly watching the Flight-37 footage in Season 3, showing that he doesn’t just hate Homelander for what he did to Becca, but also for what he does, and did, to innocent people. Season 4 shows Butcher is a competent baker, following his wife's cookie recipe as he handles all the ingredients and tools with seemingly firm experience.
His Own Worst Enemy: His own nature as an inherently violent person is what causes him to clash with his teammates so much, and drives Becca away since he is incapable of leaving the path of revenge. He then clashes with his literal dark side in the form of Kessler, who tries to get him to wipe out all Supes. Butcher resists for a while until Ryan kills Mallory, and now they are no longer enemies.
Hollywood Atheist: Butcher is a Jerkass (well, with a soft side), who goes out of his way to argue with a Christian at the Believe Expo, saying that if God does exist, he's a world heavyweight cunt.
Hourglass Plot: The first two seasons have Butcher obssessed with taking down Supes in general and Homelander in particular due to a combination of Fantastic Racism and, in Homelander's case, Revenge, making it a necessity for MM to rein Butcher in. Season 3 sees Butcher finally get a hold of his racism, while his desire to kill Homelander shifts from "make Homelander pay for raping his (Butcher's) wife" to "Homelander is having a psychotic break and needs to be killed before he goes on a rampage", which leads him to take Temp-V and recruit Soldier Boy in an effort to finally kill Homelander. MM, however, has not forgiven Soldier Boy for killing his (MM's) family (by accident) and this ends up being a major factor in why MM ultimately leaves the group (the other being Butcher's hypocrisy and continuously being The Unfettered).
Hunter of His Own Kind: Becomes this after he accepts Kessler's help and permanently gains superpowers, being dead set on enacting a Supe genocide while now being a Supe himself.
Hypocrite:
Tries to get Mallory back in the game by claiming she owes him for training him like a Howitzer, pointing him at Homelander and then quitting. When Hughie tries the same reasoning to get him to help rescue The Boys, Butcher blows him off.
He accuses the Boys of having a "case of vagina" that's distracting them from their goals. This coming from the guy who's fuelled by vengeance for his wife and ready to drop the Boys as soon as it looks like he's going to reunite with her.
In Season 3, he ends up taking Temp-V in order to "level the playing field" after Hughie tells him that there's no "right" way to deal with Vought. However, in a later conversation with Maeve, he drunkenly reveals just how much he hates having to rely on the same level of power as the Supes he resents so much to finally do some meaningful damage.
After all his griping in Seasons 1&2 about working with the Female and Starlight, in Season 3 he has no problem with proposing "a team-up" with Soldier Boy.
Season 3 also has him recruit Soldier Boy to help take down Homelander, brushing aside the fact that Soldier Boy killed MM's family, something Marvin calls Butcher out on.
Hypocrite Has a Point: Yes, Butcher is a hypocrite for wanting to keep MM from getting revenge on Soldier Boy so that he can use Soldier Boy to kill Homelander. However, he has good reasons for this:
Soldier Boy might be the only one who can kill Homelander, as SB's Chest Blaster ability can De-power Supes.
Marvin stands no chance of killing Soldier Boy due to the latter's powers.
Soldier Boy isn't interested in a vendetta against Marvin.
Soldier Boy has been shown to be unpredictable in the usage of his radiation powers. As such, Butcher is right in keeping MM away from Soldier Boy to keep him safe. In fact, Butcher keeping MM in the same room as him is exactly what saves his life when Soldier Boy is triggered yet again by Love Sausage's music.
I Am What I Am: Butcher is aware how miserable he is and how many times he crossed any moral line.
Ignored Epiphany: After being warned by his nightmare vision of Lenny that Hughie will die and Annie confirming that he will if he keeps taking V24, Billy decides not to tell Hughie the truth and encourages him to keep taking it.
Impersonating an Officer: Billy Butcher claims he's an FBI Agent at first when recruiting Hughie into the Boys. He later admits otherwise.
Improbable Weapon User: Billy Butcher wields a superpowered baby as a weapon by making it blast blue beams from its eyes at some security guards.
In Harm's Way: After the events of Season 2, Butcher goes clean for a full year, with no killing or drinking, until an unfortunate night Homelander visits him and provokes Billy to a final duel. After that, he returns to his old agenda, knowing he cannot live a normal life.
It's All About Me: Billy is seemingly incapable of putting others' wishes before his own agenda.
He is furious that his wife's family bought a grave plot and placed a headstone there so they had a place to mourn Becca after eight years. His sister-in-law begs him to understand that their elderly mother needed a place to talk to her daughter, but Billy smashes the headstone regardless of the Saunders family's feelings.
He backs out of a deal with Raynor that would expose Vought for many of their abusive practices because she refuses to prosecute Homelander, knowing that would be impossible, never mind that the deal would have benefited everyone on his team, including himself.
His escape plan for Becca only involves saving Becca, not Ryan. Then, after Homelander takes Ryan and Becca asks him to help get her son back, he goes behind her back to make a deal with Stan Edgar where Becca would be permanently separated from the child she loves so he could get her back without Homelander's son underfoot. He only reneges on the deal at the last second.
I've Come Too Far: When MM asks him he allied himself with Soldier Boy and drugged him, Butcher tells him it is because he cannot draw any line.
Jerkass Façade: Season 3 sees Billy double down on the Jerkass behavior he has started to outgrow for the sake of the current mission to get a weapon to kill Homelander with. This includes accusing Ryan of causing Becca's death to keep him from getting involved and forcing Frenchie and Kimiko to do jobs with which they have clear reservations (plus outright calling them weapons for him to use). Unlike the old Butcher, it's clear that he has reservations about this, especially with what he said to Ryan. When they end up meeting again in Season 4, Billy more or less admits to deliberately pushing Ryan away, believing he would just end up becoming abusive to him down the line.
Jerkass Has a Point: At best he's a callous jerk but a lot of what he says can be pretty damn convincing;
After they witness Popclaw killing her landlord while drugged up on Compound V, Hughie tries calling Billy out on the fact that he let a man die. Billy is quick to retort however that, even if he did let Hughie go to save the landlord, he'd more than likely arrive too late and would have gotten killed by a panicked Popclaw. He makes a similar point later after Kimiko's brother destroys a police helicopter trying to take him out, pointing that the pilots were likely killed either by the attack or the crash, and that if they stuck around to save them, they'd likely be caught and arrested.
He shames a support group for not being angry at the supes for crippling and castrating them, proclaiming they have no self-respect when they forgive their attackers so quickly for such unforgivable acts. Given how the average supe behaves, it's likely none of them even remember the hurt they've caused these people.
His biased views towards supes are justified as well since they are a legitimate threat when they aren't handled properly and their villainous acts require retribution, not lionization.
He's right that Becca is still alive, not dead.
While his aggression towards Hughie is largely motivated by his bias towards Supes, he is right that Hughie is too deep into their war against Supes to get out now.
When the others get upset at him for his underwhelming reaction to Hughie and Starlight exposing Compound V to the public, he rightfully points out that, while it's certainly an achievement, they are currently trying to transport a powerful Supe Terrorist so they can clear their names and reunite him and Mother's Milk with their loved ones, meaning they can't afford to get too excited and "take their eye off the ball".
Later on, after Kimiko's brother destroys a police helicopter Billy was negotiating with and MM glares at him, Butcher rightfully points out that it wasn't his fault. And he's right, as Frenchie tried giving The Male a metal can to drink from that he used to escape, which MM rightfully chews him out for.
After learning of her involvement in the incident where Soldier Boy met his Uncertain Doom, he's quick to call Mallory out on hiding the existence of something they could potentially use to kill Homelander ever since the group was formed, citing that Becca could still be alive and Ryan wouldn't be living in paranoid fear if he was dead. While Mallory tries to retort that he's just using others as excuses to lash out again, it's hard not to see Billy's point; a lot of the pain, misery and deaths that have occurred throughout the series, not just that of Becca and Ryan, could have been avoided if they were able to take out Homelander, the most dangerous of the Supes, as soon as humanly possible and deal a major blow against Vought. And while this supposed weapon is not guaranteed to do the job, the lack of available options certainly makes it worth a shot, especially much earlier when Homelander still had the blind love of the public and as a result was not on the cusp of a Villainous Breakdown-induced rampage.
Butcher pointedly calls out, despite being heavily drunk off his ass, that the problem with Supes isn't their powers per se but the fact they are almost collectively a bunch of covert narcissists that have been given everything they could of ever wanted by a silver spoon and that Compound V did nothing to make them that way, it only brought a means to express the things they were conditioned to become instead. Which is entirely on point with why Supes like Homelander are the Tyke Bombs they ended up being is because of the way they became, rather than a strict issue of the powers themselves.
His desire and plans to use a virus to kill all supes, not just massive threats like Homelander, is horrible but given how many supes we've seen throughout who are horrible people who have no kind of accountability, there is a certain kind of logic to thinking it's best to just wipe them all out and that Homelander is such a threat to humanity that any effort that kills him is worth taking, even if it means also killing the genuinely heroic ones like Annie too.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He's foul-mouthed and manipulative, but fundamentally a good man who's trying to expose the Supes' crimes for what they are, and frequently has Pet the Dog moments.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: While Butcher was never the most well-adjusted or kind-hearted bloke around, in Season 3 after discovering Mallory hid the truth from him and that he spent months working for a Vought supe, Billy becomes more sociopathic and spiteful than ever. He starts using Temp-V, cuts off ties with Ryan, murders Gunpowder, becomes more openly emotionally abusive towards the rest of the team, makes a deal with Soldier Boy and goes on a warpath against Homelander once again, with no care for collateral damage. All while dragging Hughie along. Butcher does eventually comes back to his senses, but by then is to late, since the V24 abuse left him with only months to live. Billy then spends all of Season 4 trying to redeem himself, even refusing to hand over information to pull the rug out from under the Boys and refusing to allow a supe-killing virus to be unleashed on the general populace, knowing people like Kimiko, Annie, and Ryan would be affected. This is shown by his wife appearing as a sort of shoulder angel while his former colleague Kessler in the real world tries to advise him to kill all the supes. However, even after he learns Kessler is just the manifestation of his inner anti-Supe desires, after Ryan kills Mallory in the final episode of Season 4, Butcher's sympathies are done away with entirely and he fully and gleefully goes along with Kessler's suggestions, killing Victoria Neumann in cold blood and taking the virus for himself with full intent to unleash it upon the general populace.
Kick the Morality Pet: Butcher does this to Hughie and the entire team in the Season 4 finale. Once Billy finds The Boys are planning on working with Neuman to take down Vought and Homelander, Hughie begs Butcher, for Lenny's sake, to trust them on it. Butcher's response? Toss Hughie aside and hold the entire team at tentacle point as he kills Neuman. Then he non-subtly threatens Frenchie into giving him the virus. At this point, it's clear there is no one in the world whom Billy won't hurt or just kill in his genocidal crusade.
Knight in Sour Armor: He'll be the first to admit he's no hero and that his taking down superheroes is purely driven by a desire for revenge. Yet in the Season 2 finale he's ready to sacrifice his life to buy Becca the time she needs to escape and later throws himself between Homelander and Ryan armed with nothing but a crowbar because he made a promise to Becca to protect her son as she died in his arms.
Lack of Empathy: Butcher is not a sociopath, but he just lacks any sort of empathy for the supes, no matter who they are. He dislikes the idea of anyone sympathising or approaching them, or in Hughie's case, dating them, and cannot understand why people around him don't hate them like he does. When he went with Hughie to a group of Supes survivors, he suffered an emotional breakdown because the people were not rageful and out in the streets killing the supes, despite being victims, never mind those people just being traumatized and untrained civilians with no CIA back-up like him. Part of his Character Development in Season 2 is learning to empathize with others, to the point that by the finale, he's at least able to show and feel sympathy for Ryan.
Last-Name Basis: Becca is maybe the only character that actually calls him "Billy", while Homelander uses "William". Everyone else- from the Boys to his own wife's son- call him "Butcher" exclusively.
The Leader: Billy is the driving force that keeps others focused on their goal with his ability to persuade others and his unrelenting bullheadedness.
Like Father, Like Son: His greatest fear is that he is too much like his father. That's why is leaves Ryan in Mallory's care.
Mallory: This was never about Ryan or Becca. It was always selfish. Always and only for you. For the hate inside that you want to let loose on the world. I thought maybe you changed, but I was wrong. You are your father. You've always have been.
Season 3 Episode 7 confirms this as Mindstorm's Mind Rape forces Billy to revisit his past and learn he has become exactly like his father if not worse, adopting all of Sam Butcher's nastiest qualities while also growing some of his own.
Living on Borrowed Time: The end of Season 3 reveals that overuse of Temp-V has left him terminally ill.
Made of Iron: He can keep going after taking a serious beating.
Make Way for the New Villains: He viciously kills Victoria Neuman in the Season 4 finale, taking her place as the biggest threat to world alongside Homelander.
Manipulative Bastard: He will say or do anything to get the results he wants. When the proper authorities can't guarantee that Homelander will pay for his crimes if Billy hands over the information he's gathered, he refuses to hand over any of it. Then he lies to the Boys, claiming the government was too cowardly to act on any of the evidence, convincing them that their only option is to go after the supes themselves.
Manly Facial Hair: Butcher has a well-trimmed beard that helps portray him as a tough Vigilante Man.
Meaningful Name: His full first name, William, means "Vehement protector". And then there's his last name... His middle name might as well be "the".
Mirror Character:
Is been always hinted through the show that Butcher and Homelander have similarities, but their usual arcs also made them different from each other, until Season 3, where Eric Kripke, confirms for 'Herogasm' breakdown that: "Homelander and Butcher are really like two sides of the same coin. Um, they have very similar arcs, you know in episode one and in episode two, you know, they both feel like aggrieved and their steam kettles are boiling and then they both finally explode in their own ways. And, in many ways, they are like the two poles of the show, you know. It's sorta like we talk about them sometimes as Superman/Lex Luthor or Holmes/Moriarty like they're like the two centers of gravity. So, in their obsession with each other it's sort of inevitable that they start to kind of take on, you know, some of each other's traits.
Despite having contrasting personalities, MM and Butcher have more similarities than they would ever admit. Both are former military men, both lost loved ones at the hand of supes (Homelander and Soldier Boy) that became the catalyst for who they are in present day, and both are worried about negatively influencing their children. Butcher and M.M. have even similar archenemies in Homelander and Soldier Boy, who is seen as "the Homelander before Homelander".
Season 4 highlights one more time they have the same worries regarding Ryan and Janine. In a heart to heart conversation with Ryan, Butcher confesses to the boy that he told him such harsh words because he has a habit of pushing people away out of fear of not dragging them down with him. Sister Sage pushes MM's button by reminding him of his own fears of not passing his OCD and violent side to Janine.
The Mirror Shows Your True Self: As Season 4 ends and Butcher drives off into the horizon, he glances in his rear-view mirror and sees Kessler in his place, illustrating that his crueler side has fully taken over.
Morality Chain Beyond the Grave: He promised to Becca that he will take care of Ryan. After her death, he spends the next seasons trying to take the boy back from Homelander. In season 4, he fights against his darker alter ego who tries to convince Butcher to just kill all the supes, including Ryan, whereas his better side is represented by a hallucination of Becca trying to encourage him to be better. Unfortunately, by the time he realises this, the "Kessler" hallucination has become so strong that the Becca one barely even shows up anymore.
Mr. Fanservice: No matter how heavily his macho behavior is deconstructed, Karl Urban still looks damn good in those unbuttoned shirts and trenchcoats, and the show knows it. When they initially meet, Hughie mentions that he looks like he's starring in a porn version of The Matrix.
My Greatest Failure:
Leaving his brother Lenny behind at home to join the military. Billy believed that their dad wouldn't be as abusive to Lenny if he was gone, but instead, it only made Sam focus all his cruelty onto Lenny, leading Lenny to kill himself. Butcher has never forgiven himself for not being there for Lenny.
At some point in their marriage, Butcher ended up committing adultery by having a one-night stand with an unnamed waitress while drunk. Whether or not Becca knew of it is ambiguous but Butcher was deeply ashamed of the act and quickly resolved to do better by quitting the bottle.
Despite being forced to leave the real Joe Kessler for dead on a mission, "Kessler's" words during the Tomato in the Mirror reveal heavily imply that Butcher was haunted by this decision deep down for years. It says a lot that out of all the people who are close to Butcher, Joe Kessler's form is the one that "Kessler" impersonates (along with Fake Memories) to comfort Butcher when the latter is at his lowest and most isolated at the beginning of Season 4.
The Name Is Bond, James Bond: How Billy introduces himself to Hughie in the first episode.
Billy Butcher : "Name is Butcher. Billy Butcher."
Names to Run Away from Really Fast: "Butcher" is pretty descriptive.
Nerves of Steel: Doesn't even raise an eyebrow at Popclaw crushing the landlord's head with her thighs while the rest of the Boys react horrified or look away. And when finally confronting Homelander at Stillwell's home, the latter remarks Butcher is the only person he's met who knows what he can do yet doesn't fear him.
'90s Anti-Hero: Fits this trope to a T. He's a vengeful Vigilante Man with an intimidating name, who sports a Badass Longcoat, a foul mouth, a troubled past, and doesn't care about hurting people who get in his way. Deconstructed as, for all his coolness, Billy is ultimately a pretty toxic person whose actions harm both himself and the people he cares about.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: The sparingly few times he does try to take the high-road, it usually explodes it his face.
His decision to prioritize protecting Ryan over killing Homelander in Season 3 leads to the latter being able to leave with the former due to Homelander bonding with Ryan after Butcher had forced the boy away for his own safety.
Him deciding to spare a Compound-V infused rabbit results in it dying agonizingly to a V-enhanced tumor, which soon begins attacking the Boys.
This comes to a head in the Season 4 finale, where Butcher tries to appeal to Ryan one last time and get him onboard with facing Homelander. Mallory has gotten so desperate by this point that she threatens to lock him in a bunker if he doesn't agree to her and Butcher's plans (something Butcher wasn't onboard with), which leads to Ryan accidentally killing her when he tries shoving her away. After seeing this, along with mistaking Ryan's numbness for apathy, Butcher finally seems to give up and nods to his hallucination of Kessler, giving in to his worse impulses and fully giving in to villainy.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: He kept on beating Gunpowder until he broke his skull, even after the latter told him everything he knew about what had happened to Soldier Boy.
Nominal Hero: Discussed several times by him, Mallory and M.M. He is using his quest for revenge against Homelander as an excuse to kill Supes. It just happens that his actions are helping the victims of the Supes.
Noodle Incident: Something about an underage hooker string on electroshock made the Legend lose his trust in Butcher. What happened, is never detailed.
Not Afraid to Die: By Season 3, Butcher had moved from being a Death Seeker to this trope - while he no longer actively seeks out death, he's willing to die if it will help him achieve his goals. After learning from Starlight that overusing Temp-V will have fatal consequences, his only thought before going to get more is to knock out Hughie, who has been on a Power High from using the substance, because while Butcher doesn't care if he lives or dies, he won't let Hughie go down with him. In the Season 4 finale, Frenchie tells Billy that if he goes through with the virus, it will work on him too. He doesn't seem to care.
Not So Above It All: When Marvin has an affectionate phone call with his wife, he can't help but laugh at it. Also, when he meets Lamplighter, he fails to contain his laughter at the latter's outfit.
Not So Similar: He's this to Homelander. Both are aggressive men with major anger issues and have Fantastic Racism toward members of the 'other' group, while also being the manipulative leaders of their own teams. But while Homelander lacks any sort of morality and has no healthy relationships to speak of, murdering his own mother figure, and abusing his own son (admittedly due to the fact he has no idea how to be a normal parent), Billy actually has a moral compass and he genuinely empathizes with his teammates, loves his aunt, mother, and dog, and ultimately decides to relinquish care of Ryan to Mallory, knowing he can't be the father the boy needs. In contrast to Homelander's nice facade, inability to admit to any fault, and refusal to change his ways for the better, Billy is incredibly honest about who he is, can admit his faults, and does make a sincere effort to be better. Even when Butcher finally descends into villainy, it's only after an extremely sincere effort to be a better person that ends with one of his friends dying due to his actions.
Not Worth Killing: Homelander prefers taunting Butcher for most of their conflict and by the time Homelander does consider killing him Sister Sage warns him that Butcher already lives on borrowed time there is no reason to kill him so close to their coup d'État.
OOC Is Serious Business:
The rest of the Boys are so used to Billy being a jerk, that him being nice on the phone is enough to tell Hughie and MM that something is seriously wrong.
Despite being completely willing to stoop down to their enemies' level in the fight against Vought, even to the point of taking Temp V, he is seriously appalled at Hughie's initial request to try some of the Temp V himself, and tries to tell Hughie off by remarking that the V is poison and he shouldn't want anything to do with it.
Ooh, Me Accent's Slipping: Karl Urban is an actor from New Zealand, playing what is presumably some kind of approximate Cockney or Estuary English speaker, to meet the requirements of American television.. Let's just say it's hard to spot which British accent he is trying to convey, when he manages to keep it at all.
Papa Wolf: Despite Ryan not being his blood, Butcher does come to care about him as if he were his own son. When Soldier Boy tries to kill Ryan along with Homelander, it causes Butcher to actually go back on the deal and cost him his best chance at finally killing his archenemy. He also begins to act this way toward Hughie due to viewing him as a reflection of his little brother Lenny. When Soldier Boy strikes Hughie for almost allowing Mindstorm to escape, Butcher gives Soldier Boy the Death Glare.
Parental Substitute: Despite his initial hostility towards Ryan at the end of Season 2, by Season 3 he has bonded with him considerably, with Ryan even viewing him more like a father than his real dad. However he struggles with his attachment to Ryan as he is not over Becca's death, or his Fantastic Racism.
Pay Evil unto Evil: Deconstructed with his murder of Victoria Neuman, who was a remorseless mass murderer and an opportunistic corrupt politician that was (from everyone's POV at least) a living keystone and willing accessory of the coup, and only threw her lot with the Boys when it became clear Homelander was a danger to her. While her being blindsided by Butcher's sudden attack was a karmic callback to how she routinely murdered anyone who got in her way, Butcher's decision ultimately plays right into Sage's hands and causes Homelander's coup to succeed, with the show strongly implying that Hughies's desire to let bygones be bygones would've resulted in a much better outcome for everyone involved.
Personality Power: While on V-24, he develops powers similar to Homelander, i.e. super strength, durability, and heat vision. Billy's powers are largely used for offensive purposes and fit in with his desire to avenge his wife's death and beat up Homelander in a locked room before killing him.
Pet the Dog: Despite being a generally unpleasant jerk who's racist against any and all Supes and is pretty grating to be around for even his friends, Butcher does let the remaining goodness in him show from time to time:
He gives Ryan, a Supe and the son of his most hated enemy Homelander, a precious necklace from Becca because the boy needs a memento of his mom more than he does of his wife.
He comes to see Hughie as a younger brother, and when he finds out what V-24 does with prolonged use, he literally knocks him unconscious to protect him from using it again.
Despite his stated hatred of Supes, he doesn't actually do anything to harm Supes that are harmless or allied to his cause, and he has a hidden soft spot for Annie, Kimiko, and Maeve, even having mutually enjoyable sex with the latter during their time spent together.
While the group is investigating a lab at Stan Edgar's farm, Butcher finds a rabbit that has been experimented on with Temp V and frees it. When he later finds it outside as tentacles burst out of its body, he ends up stomping it to death to put it out of its misery.
Downplayed due to the roughness of it, but when preparing to kill Neuman with his tendrils, Butcher takes a moment to move Hughie out of their path so he doesn't get hurt or killed as well.
In the first episode of Season 5, Butcher risks his own life to save Hughie from a rampaging Homelander, even if his revealing himself would immensely complicate his goals. When Butcher sees Homelander about to kill Hughie, he doesn't hesitate to step in, proving that even though he's become a brutal Villain Protagonist, Butcher still retains his soft spot for Hughie.
Politically Incorrect Hero:
Downplayed; Billy doesn't hesitate to call a support group full of physically disabled people wimps, as they were all willing to forgive the supes that left them in that condition, although this has less to do with their actual disabilities and more to do with his own personal rage at the group's members for not being rightfully angry at the supes for ruining their lives and letting them get away with it.
In Season 2, he accuses Frenchie and Milk of having a "raging case of vagina" when they back Hughie and Kimiko.
Played for Drama in Season 3 when it's revealed that he called his brother a homophobic slur in a moment of anger, right before leaving him behind to join the military. It's shown to be his greatest regret, however, and he doesn't appear to be bigoted towards gay people in present day.
Primal Fear: He tells Ryan that he is bloody terrified of death.
Protagonist Journey to Villain: Over the course of the series, he gradually transforms into a genocidal maniac akin to his comic counterpart at the end of Season 4.
Psychotic Smirk: Does this frequently, usually when he's plotting something nefarious or threatening others, or when he finally gets his chance to put his hands on Homelander, with the best one being after betraying the Boys and stealing the Supe Virus.
Putting the Band Back Together: Billy spends first episodes seeking out Frenchie and M.M. to join in his quest against Vought, who are less than happy when Butcher shows up at their door.
Pyrrhic Victory: By the end of Season 2. He's followed through on his threat to Homelander and made him feel what he put Butcher through 8 years ago when the Boys' schemes end with Homelander's girlfriend fried alive and his son forever disowning him, with the added bonus of the Boys' criminal records expunged. However, Becca also died in the crossfire, meaning much of what he did for the past eight years amounted to nothing in the end.
Rage Against the Heavens: His bias towards Supes is fueled by his need to kill Homelander for raping and murdering his wife. His single-minded pursuit of revenge has sacrificed all of his personal relationships and his morality. His hatred of Supes is matched by his misotheism, as he sees God as a cruel, selfish figure who'd rather sacrifice his own son than take the initiative to fix Earth's problems. The comparison is driven home when Homelander reveals he sees himself as a god amongst men.
Real Men Wear Pink:
He has encyclopedic knowledge of the Spice Girls. This is because his wife Becca was a huge fan.
He also rocks Hawaiian shirts on occasion.
Redemption Failure: Butcher spends Season 4 trying to make amends with Ryan and make peace with the rest of the Boys, having looked back on his life and realized what a complete Jerkass he was to everyone he cared about. Complicating this is that his attempts to take Compound V to escape death instead gave him a super-powered tumor that encourages him to act on his worse impulses. Unfortunately, the season finale has everything fall apart, with Mallory's last attempt to convince Ryan to kill Homelander ending in the boy accidentally killing her. Seemingly accepting that trying to take the high-road just won't work, Butcher gives into to Kessler and goes back on the warpath to wipe out all Supes, with the possible exceptions of Ryan, Kimiko, and Annie.
Red Pill, Blue Pill: Butcher gives an entire speech to Hughie about choosing the red or the blue pill, trying to encourage him to meet A-Train and implant a bug inside Vought. Though he gets the colors mixed up.
Relative Button:
His wife is another one for him; when Hughie uses her as a question on Billy's motivation for hating Supes, Billy is stunned, silent, and absolutely furious with Hughie. The fact that M.M. and Frenchie collectively shit a brick after hearing this also suggests this is a definitive red flag and a subject to be avoided like the plague. At the end of "Proper Preparation and Planning", he punched Hughie and warns him not to get in his way of rescuing Becca again.
Don't even think about mentioning his little brother's name. Let alone the circumstances surrounding his death.
Respected by the Respected: Butcher, a regular person with no powers if a very tough fighter, is the only person in existence that Homelander truly admires and respects, which is reflected in the way Homelander always addresses him, being the only one calling Butcher, "William".
Revenge Before Reason: To Billy, all Supes are evil and he'll never be convinced otherwise. His pursuit to kill Homelander has cost him everything. He also came very close to murdering Ryan when he accidentally got Becca killed.
Revenge Is Not Justice: The Boys do agree with him about the Supes needing to be punished for their many, many wrongdoings but decree that he is the lesser of two evils compared to Homelander. Hughie calls him out for hating Starlight despite her attempts to help, Becca berates him for hating Ryan because of his lineage, and Annie calls him a bully and compares him to Homelander.
Sanity Slippage: Butcher was never all there, but it gets worse in Season 4. While his hallucination of of Becca appeals to his better angels, he's revealed to have been hallucinating a dead Kessler who pushes him to embrace his worst desires. By the end, Butcher is left disturbed by the knowledge he wants a genocide of all Supes and has for a while.
Secretly Dying: The season three finale reveals that V24 has wrecked his brain so badly that he has at least a few months left to live, with a year at most.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Hughie is Butcher's bookish, Lovable Coward and nice sidekick.
Sex for Solace: He and Maeve end up banging in Season 3 after his trip to Russia goes awry.
Slasher Smile: Tends to smile before he inflicts serious hurt on someone.
Sleeps in the Nude: No pajamas for Butcher during the night. He sleeps completely naked, dreaming that he is covered by Becca's arms.
Small Parent, Huge Child: "Butcher, Baker and Candlestick Maker" shows Butcher is taller than both his parents, especially his mother who barely comes up to his collarbone.
So Proud of You: Downplayed with Billy toward Starlight. In Season 2, he shows a certain approval when Annie starts making morally questionable choices to get results, seeing it as her becoming more like him. Annie, however, is clearly uncomfortable with this and resents his approval, while Butcher can’t help but smirk. This continues later, such as when Annie threatens Worm with killing him if doesn't comply in Season 5, with Butcher again smirking with visible satisfaction at her harsher approach.
Sour Outside, Sad Inside: His gruff and unfriendly demeanor covers up the pain he feels from losing Becca. The support group leader pegs him as one of these on first sight.
Split-Personality Merge: Season 4 concludes with Butcher giving in to "Kessler", who represents the darkest aspects of his mind, and becoming a genocidal Humanoid Abomination as a result.
Staring Down Cthulhu: He has a stare-down with Homelander at the A-Train vs. Shockwave race, which leads to Homelander remembering who Butcher is.
Stealth Hi/Bye: Butcher has an insane talent for getting into places he really shouldn't be, up to and including the office of the Deputy Director of the CIA (when she herself needs a keycard to unlock the door).
Strong and Skilled: In terms of human qualities, he is in peak physical condition and a master combatant. When he becomes an Empowered Badass Normal, he can go toe-to-toe with Homelander due to his fighting experience despite being physically weaker.
Sympathetic Adulterer: While he and Becca were married, he cheated on her with a waitress while drunk. While it’s ambiguous whether Becca knew or not, he regrets what happened and is shown to sincerely love her to change himself, including cutting off the alcohol. Kessler brings this up to convince him to renounce his promise to Becca of taking care of Ryan.
Tall, Dark, and Snarky: Being played by Karl Urban and having a cunt-y sense of humour, Butcher fits this to a T.
Team Dad: A pretty scary version. It's [[Lampshaded]] in the first episode of Season 2 when he shows up at the end.
Butcher: This is a fսcking mess, son. We got a Supe terrorist, Raynor's blown her canister, and we're the most wanted cսոts in the country. But don't you worry. Daddy's home.
Teens Are Monsters: As a teenager abused by his father, he was always angry and violent. Upon being caught selling marijuana, he beat up his headmaster in response with a stapler.
Then Let Me Be Evil: After all of his attempts to be a better person and Face Death with Dignity fails and witnessing Ryan seemingly being unremorseful from accidentally killing Mallory, Butcher sadly nods to Kessler into agreeing with the Supe genocide plan or else the entire world will suffer under Homelander's new regime.
Token Evil Teammate: He's easily the most morally bankrupt member of the Boys, something he revels in. Case in point, when Mallory has trouble getting through to Dr. Vogelbaum, who cites the fact he's scared Vought and/or Homelander will kill his daughter if he testifies against them, Butcher then visits him and threatens to beat his daughter to death himself, then his sons, his daughters-in-law, and his grandchildren, one-by-one. Vogelbaum is horrified that he could even threaten something so obscene. It's to the point he happily leaves his former team to rot when Calhoun enacts martial law leading to arrests of most of them, while he himself is fawning over the Supe virus and planning to commit genocide.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Given the flashbacks of him eight years ago, Billy was actually quite a decent fellow who was clearly a loving and caring husband to his wife. Losing Becca really made him a far more ruthless and callous man. Mallory's influence didn't help matters. The second season muddies this somewhat, however, with Becca revealing that Billy has always had a dark side to him, and that him eventually breaking down and lashing out was more of a question of when rather than if. Season 4 then carries it, resulting in Butcher ultimately becoming like his comics counterpart.
Took a Level in Kindness: He spends Season 1 being an unapologetically brutal Vigilante Man who's a major toxic influence on his friends, but season 2 has him confronted with how messed up his behaviour is and ultimately have a Heel Realization. He's notably less insulting towards everyone after Becca rejects him at the compound, and after spending the rest of the season continuing to be the Token Evil Teammate, he recognises what he is and tries to pull a Heroic Sacrifice to keep Homelander away from Becca and Ryan. When this fails and Becca is killed thanks to Stormfront, he protects and cares for Ryan, after having previously seen him as nothing more than a "Supe freak". Season 3 shows how far he has come — he forgoes giving Termite a Vigilante Execution so that the Supe can face justice for his crimes, and is trying to be a father to Ryan, even if he can only visit the boy sparingly. And while he is willing to use V-24 to gain powers and level the playing field with the Supes, he seems to genuinely realize he might be crossing a line doing so and is trying to fight it. Season 3 makes it clear that while Butcher is willing to give his life for the sake of vengeance, he will not sacrifice his teammates (or at least not Hughie).
Tragic Hero: No matter how hard he tries to become a better person or fight for justice Butcher's obsession with avenging his wife, unresolved trauma from his past, and general powerlessness against Vought's influence inevitably lead to him pushing his loved ones away, committing increasingly more extreme acts to further his crusade, and sinking further into becoming a bitter, vengeful monster.
Tragic Keepsake: Becca's St. Christopher medallion. He then passes this onto her son Ryan.
Tragic Villain: After being haunted by the memory of his wife and tempted by "Kessler" to commit a supe genocide to put an end to Homelander all throughout season 4, Butcher finally gives in upon seeing Ryan kill Grace Mallory. Mistaking Ryan's blank reaction for apathy, a despairing Butcher decides that trying to do the right thing is futile, and finally betrays the Boys by stealing their supe-killing virus with the intent to wipe all superhumans off the face of the earth… including himself.
Tranquil Fury: A very chilling example in the season 2 finale. After Becca is accidentally killed when Ryan awakens his Eye Beams and shoots Stormfront, Billy brandishes a very gruesome expression while grasping for his crowbar only barely containing his rage with the possible intent to murder whoever is in the vicinity until Homelander appears and barely says a word while carrying Ryan away.
Trespassing to Talk: Billy likes to surprise people this way.
First he sneaks into the house of his former associate Susan Reynor and waits in the middle of the night for her to return only to scare the hell out of her when she does.
In the showdown of season 1, he does the same with Stillwell at her home, having to incapacitate the nanny in the process.
He hides in Grace Mallory's car, and later Becca's car—the latter is justified as security cameras are all over the place, so he gets her to drive somewhere they're not.
Truer to the Text: Played for Drama, after much strides due to his Character Development changing Butcher into an arguably better person than his comic counterpart by a country mile; "Kessler", after Ryan accidentally kills Grace in a panic, ends up swaying Butcher back into his original misanthropic self after trying desperately to reject who he is underneath to the point of wishing to enact a full genocide of all Supes with a virus so unstable that it can spread into a global pandemic that can even potentially target ordinary humans, steering him back into becoming the supervillain the comics depicted him as in its finale.
Turning Into Your Parent: As revealed in a Mindstorm-induced nightmare, this is Billy's greatest fear — that he'll end up an abusive Jerkass just like his father, who abused Butcher and his brother Lenny for most of their lives, to the point that Lenny killed himself to escape it. Butcher seems set to go down this road for most of season 2, but the finale sees him finally see the light and take steps to become a better person. Unfortunately, the events of season 3 (learning that his new boss is a Supe in Vought's pocket, taking V-24 to try and gain the power to kill Homelander, and Homelander's gradual erosion of sanity) see him take a nosedive and become even more like his old man. He probably ends up becoming even worse than his father by Season 4. With all his terrible faults, Sam didn't advocate for a genocide at any costs.
The Unfettered: In Season 3, Butcher decides to cross any line possible to kill Homelander and there is the possibility he will not stop with him, as Mallory points out. Consumes V compound to "level the playing field" for once, drugs M.M., knowing his partner may try to stop him and offers Crimson Countess on a silver plate to Soldier Boy who kills her, and strikes a deal with him.
Unknown Rival: He hates Homelander with a bitter passion for raping his wife. Homelander doesn't even know who he is without some detective work. When the two finally meet, Homelander admits he's impressed by Billy's lack of fear, but he still refuses to take him seriously and spares him from death because he finds it more amusing to keep him alive for emotional torment. Subverted as of the season 2 finale, as now that Billy has separated Homelander from Ryan, Homelander hates him just as much as Billy hates Homelander.
Verbal Tic: "Oi."
Vigilante Man: Just as much as his inspiration, which resulted in getting him and the Boys accused of being terrorists by the end of Season 1.
Villain Killer: He's killed onscreen multiple Vought mercenaries, Supes like Mesmer and Translucent and Russian mobsters. He also kills Ezekiel and Neuman in Season 4.
Villain Respect: Butcher is the person to whom Homelander shows the most respect, other than Stan Edgar, because they are the only people in the series who are not afraid of him. Homelander even waits to be invited into Butcher's home, rather than simply entering the way he did with Neuman, and lets Butcher openly insult him.
Wardrobe Flaw of Characterization: Butcher wears his boots with the laces untied, reflecting his messy life style. The fact that he never remains barefoot while fighting is a miracle.
Weak, but Skilled: He's an unpowered human but his extensive combat experience and military training as well as his intellect let him get by when facing supes. When he fights Homelander while using V-24, he has a noticeable advantage with his skills along with his powers, compared to Homelander, who didn't need to ever train himself beyond "hit the thing, kill the thing."
Well-Intentioned Extremist: Butcher is violent, manipulative, and absolutely loathed superhumans, but he also sincerely wants to save the world from Vought's corruption by any means necessary and his goal of killing Homelander is ultimately for the greater good.
What the Hell, Hero?: He gets one of these each times he pulls a dickwad move for the sake of vengeance against Supes, which is pretty often. It takes a long time but eventually they starting hitting home.
What the Hell Is That Accent?: Butcher's accent is noticeably bizarre, being a mix of Cockney British, what sounds like Australian, and Karl Urban's natural New Zealand accent. It's to the point that multiple characters have commented on it.
The Deep: What, dude? I can barely understand you, your accent's insane!
With Great Power Comes Great Insanity: His philosophy is "[w]ith great power comes the absolute certainty that you'll turn into a right cunt". In fact, him taking Compound V leads to him developing a superpowered brain tumor that gradually erodes his sanity and pushes him into a genocidal Face–Heel Turn, ironically making Butcher himself an example of this trope.
Would Hurt a Child:
After using the Laser Baby to kill some Vought guards, Billy quips to the child that he will come kill him later if it doesn't keep his nose clean. Although it's very possible that he was joking based on his tone.
When Butcher decides to detonate the explosives even after Stillwell's death, knowing full well that Stillwell's baby is nearby and definitely within the blast radius. Season 2 confirms that the baby teleported to safety, though Billy didn't expect him to and was willing to write it off as collateral in his Attempted Suicide middle finger to Homelander.
When Ryan accidentally kills Becca, Butcher is about two seconds away from trying to bludgeon the boy to death with a crowbar in a blind rage before Homelander turns up.
Butcher brutally shoves Zoe onto the barrels when she was trying to fight him to (unsuccessfully) save her mother from getting murdered by him.
Your Approval Fills Me with Shame: He's very unhappy when his father starts praising him for choosing to "swim" in a sink-or-swim world, especially when Sam starts unfavorably comparing Lenny to him. Even Billy attacking his father only results in the old bastard smiling, vindicated that his efforts in turning his son into a "monster" were successful.
Your Days Are Numbered: By the Season 3 finale, Butcher's overuse of V24 shortened his remaining lifespan to only around 12 to 18 months. This is seemingly subverted by the end of season 4; giving into his darkest impulses and allowing his V-empowered cancer to take control seems to have a positive effect on his health, suggesting the sentient cancer was only killing him when Butcher wouldn't go along with its demands.