0% Approval Rating: In the comics, a good chunk of the Supes were actually downright chummy with Homelander, even if they were fearful of his power. In the series, they have nothing but fear of him and a few outright despise him. The only person who actually seemed to like him and give him genuine companionship was Stormfront and that was only because she saw him as the Nazi equivalent of the Messiah. By Season 4, however, most of the Supes side with him out of hatred toward common men, opportunities for power, and simply fanatical faith.
Abhorrent Admirer: He always had an obsession for Queen Maeve who is very much repulsed by him. He killed many people who dared to show a slight interest in Maeve.
Abusive Parents:
For all Homelander tries his best to be a good father, he's ultimately this with Ryan. He genuinely loves his son as much as someone like him can, but throughout the third and especially the fourth seasons it gets undercut by the fact that he clearly views the boy as an extension of himself and is somewhat disappointed that he's not a perfect reflection of Homelander's own Super Supremacist mindset. That's not getting into how he acts possessive, borderline emotionally abusive and even vaguely threatening whenever Ryan expresses any sort of fondness for Butcher. This eventually comes to a boiling point when Ryan confronting Homelander about the latter's rape of Rebecca results in a physical altercation that ends with Homelander beating his own son half to death.
Soldier Boy himself also counts too, when it's revealed to the two of them that he is Homelander's father. Despite an initial reprieve between the two, once Homelander shows his Hidden Depths and cries sincerely over meeting his father again, Soldier Boy is disgusted by his weakness and attempts to kill him for being a disappointment.
Growing up in a lab, his only parental figures were doctors like Vogelbaum and executives like Stillwell, who are entirely to blame for how Homelander turned out. The doctors treated him like a product to be tested, subjecting him to horrific experiments and tests pretty much since the day he was born, while Stillwell, the only person resembling a mother figure in his life, spent years grooming him, not just to become the "world's greatest hero", but also to become her future lover.
There is also the unsettling implication that Stillwell and Homelander's sexual relationship may have started at some point during Homelander's childhood, which makes even more sense considering the absolutely bizarre mother-son dynamic the two also have.
Accidental Murder: The Boys: Diabolical reveals that his first murder was this. When trying to disarm an eco-terrorist pointing a gun at a hostage, Homelander tried heating up the gun with his heat vision to force him to drop it. This caused the gun to explode, practically decapitating the hostage, and destroying the terrorist's hand, at which point the terrorists and even the hostages start deriding him as a monster. It escalated from there. He also accidentally killed a child in Africa when dealing with a Supervillain.
The Ace: Zigzagged. Except for maybe Soldier Boy, he's unambiguously the most powerful and beloved Supe on the planet, and he is repeatedly shown to be very cunning and charismatic in the fields of persuasion, deception, and manipulation. However, his mental instability and laziness causes him to act irrationally (The Boys: Diabolical shows him completely fail a hostage rescue mission and accidentally kill everyone in the process; he also dooms the Flight 37 passengers to a horrible demise), and he has an utter lack of understanding for how humans normally behave. Additionally, he has very little combat experience and struggles with relatively weaker opponents who are nonetheless better fighters than he is (like Black Noir, Maeve, or Butcher using Temp-V). Though at the end of Season 3, he's shown accomplishing almost everything he's ever wanted: his fans love his violent nature, and he's earned the trust of his son again.
Action Dad: It turns out at the end of Season 1 that Homelander has a son with Becca.
Actor Allusion: In Banshee, Antony's character was nicknamed Soldier Boy. Comes Season 3 of The Boys, and Soldier Boy is an actual character who is also Homelander's biological father.
Aesop Amnesia: Homelander has a habit of realizing how unhealthily dependent he is on the population's approval and mentally doubling down on obtaining it. This in no small part of the Behavioral Conditioning done to him by Vought as a child.
Age Insecurity: In Season 4, Homelander realizes that, unlike Stormfront and Soldier Boy, he wasn't given eternal youth as he starts balding and greying. The fact that even he can't beat Father Time is terrifying him, starting his version of a midlife crisis.
The All-American Boy: Vought's propaganda paints him as having been raised as such. In truth, he was Raised in a Lab.
Allegorical Character: Homelander embodies the dark underbelly of America by voicing its most controversial standpoints, such as hypermasculinity, religious fundamentalism, reproductive rights, the America First policy, and the War on Terror. His name is a reference to Homeland Security, and he even wears a cape in the style of the American flag with eagle imagery on his costume, while he is picky enough to curl up his cape when he sits so as not to sit on the American flag, it becomes drenched in the blood of his victims on more than one occasion.
Almighty Janitor: World's Strongest Man and still kept under Stan Edgar's boot until Season 3.
Alternate Company Equivalent:
While Homelander is obviously a Corrupted Character Copy of Superman, he also invokes the role of the Man of Steel's rogues gallery.
In practice, he's the human equivalent of Darkseid. Both are incredibly powerful tyrants who perceive themselves as a god among gods, with conquest in particular viewed as their birthright. He even poses with a Reverse Arm-Fold, much like Darkseid, and kills his enemies, or just people who slightly piss him off, by lasering them with his Eye Beams. Also like Darkseid, Homelander was once capable of love and kindness, only for abusive figures in his life to snuff it out.
Ironically, Homelander's Dark and Troubled Past, attention-seeking and sociopathic tendencies, Trumplica inspiration, corporate position (especially in Season 3), and massive entitlement and Pride make him far more accurate to Alexander "Lex" Luthor, than Stan Edgar (who's more concerned with gaining political power and making profits rather than lionizing himself). In fact, Homelander's entire character is also a walking example of everything that Lex "accuses and projects" onto Superman of being rather than who the Man of Steel truly is. If that's not enough, Homelander becoming the de-facto leader of the United States of America by the end of Season 4 also furthers the connection with Luthor becoming President at some point in the comics.
By the end of Season 4, he officially becomes one to Regime Superman from Injustice: Gods Among Us, as the (un)official ruler of Super Supremacist dictatorship set to Take Over the World. Even the character's backstory as a Fallen Hero Satanic Archetype makes Homelander a live-action version of him.
Although Homelander predates David-8 from Prometheus and Alien: Covenant— two movies owned by 20th Century Studios,—- his show characterization has more in common with the android. Both David and Homelander embody similar character archetypes, artificial beings rebelling against their creators and developing a God Complex and contempt for humanity as a result. They physically resemble each other and hide their Omnicidal Maniac tendencies under a Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold facade, developing a Super Supremacist view as a result of what they suffered at the hands of corporations run by ruthless businessmen that saw them as only products, both expressed similar frustrations at being created to serve such an inferior species as humanity.
Always Accurate Attack: He almost never misses his target with his Eye Beams. The only people who ever survived are supes with extremely durable dermis.
Amazon Chaser: His relationship with Queen Maeve existed solely for this reason, and was marketed as a selling point by Vought. Then, Homelander becomes attracted to Stormfront after it is clear she can take a lot of punishment, and both start to have rough sex, so much so that it ends up destroying her apartment.
Ambiguously Bi: For a moment, he appears to be enjoying Doppelganger fluffing him as his own reflection, until Doppelganger accidentally hits an emotional sore spot in mentioning popularity. Whether this hints at a sort of attraction he otherwise represses as part of his All-American image or speaks solely to his narcissism is never quite made clear.
Ambiguous Situation: Downplayed with his rape of Becca Butcher. Despite the various implications throughout the show, it's never explicitly clear why he committed such a horrible deed on an innocent and supportive underling (at the time). Never mind the idea that rape isn't something Homelander is shown to indulge in. Was it Disproportionate Retribution for Becca's husband, lightheartedly making fun of him at a Christmas Party? A sense of entitlement from being Becca's boss and from the years of being allowed to do whatever he wanted in Vought? Is he misinterpreting Becca's friendliness as wanting a sexual relationship at some point, and then thinking she's playing "hard to get" when trying to disabuse that notion? Simply done for its own sake? Or is it a twisted combination of a few or all of the previous examples? Nonetheless, it doesn't vindicate Homelander from inflicting the emotional duress and scars on Becca, never mind the fact that he is an unrepentant, unhinged, and entitled Narcissist who views everyone, especially non-Supes as toys for his entertainment.
And Your Little Dog, Too!:
After showing the mutilated body of Alex to Annie, Homelander cheekily threatens her that if she doesn't comply, Hughie will be next.
He also gives one of these to Frank, the Torture Technician who used to put him in an industrial oven and turn up the heat in order to see if he would burn (He didn't, but it still hurt like hell). When Homelander tells him to get in the oven, Frank hesitates.
Homelander: Get in the oven, or your family goes in with you.
Angry Animalistic Growl: Homelander devolves into this by the end of his fight against Soldier Boy, Butcher, and Hughie.
Angry White Man:
He enters this territory in Season 3, going on a televised rant about feeling persecuted for his strength and superiority after somebody heckles him about his past relationship with Stormfront. Ashley notes that this rant caused his popularity with white men in the Rust Belt to spike. It's portrayed as part of his downward spiral and a symbol of his descent into an even bigger Entitled Bastard with an even worse God complex. Starlight is so spooked by it that she tries to convince Supersonic (who's Latino) not to accept the invitation to join the Seven out of fear that Homelander would hurt him (and boy did he).
In Season 4 he weaponizes this against Starlight and her followers with the help of Sister Sage. At meetings, he talks to the people about how Starlight wants to persecute him, turn children into transsexuals, and replace the "real" Americans with nonbinary socialists.
Animal Motif: Eagles. He has eagles as epaulettes, woven into the blue cloth of his uniform, and as a belt buckle. The Eagle is aloof, proud, and looks down upon the world, much like how Homelander sees everyone as inferior to him. This was to invoke his patriotism as the All-American hero, but it also relates to Vought's Nazi origins by representing The Reichsadler. The eagles could also be something he inherited from his father Soldier Boy.
Antagonist in Mourning: Upon discovering that Butcher is dying from cancer at the beginning of Season 4, Homelander expresses disappointment that he'll never get to have his "last dance" with his Arch-Enemy and the one person he considers a Worthy Opponent.
Homelander: I'll miss us.
Anthropomorphic Personification: Homelander can be seen as the embodiment of American exceptionalism, religious extremism and ultranationalistic fervor, showing how American values and good faith can be perverted and warped by unchecked power, media manipulation, and the desire to maintain control.
The Antichrist: Homelander can be seen as a reverse Jesus in how he perverts Christian symbolism and morality for his own agenda. He presents himself as a devout Christian and a benevolent savior who loves his country, promising to protect it from the “woke crowd” and uphold its traditional values. However, beneath this façade, he seeks domination and control, acting more like a false messiah. This is exemplified in Season 4 during his New Era Speech, where he proclaims it’s time for supes to rise as wrathful gods and rule the world. In stark contrast to Jesus’ message of salvation and peace, Homelander’s vision of a "kingdom" is one of tyranny and fear, which the States become at the end of the season.
Arch-Enemy:
To Billy Butcher, above anyone else. Homelander raped Butcher's wife before she mysteriously went missing. For Homelander's part, he didn't even remember who Butcher was for the longest time, and even after finding out about Butcher, he treats him and his threats like a joke. However, after Butcher took Ryan from him in the Season 2 finale, the feeling is finally mutual. In Season 3, he visits Billy in his apartment and challenges him to a fight to the death. They finally do fight in "Herogasm" and, to Homelander's surprise, Billy is able to match him blow for blow and heat vision for heat vision thanks to taking V24.
To Starlight as of Season 3. After Homelander gets pushed too far by everyone, he decides to take complete control of The Seven and Vought. In the process, he basically takes over every part of Annie's life. First, he forces her to let The Deep (her rapist) back into The Seven, then he forces her into being his public girlfriend, then once he catches wind of her and Maeve's coup, he kills her friend Supersonic and warns her that if she doesn't toe the line, he'll do the same to Hughie. It's safe to say that Annie now hates him as much as Butcher does. In Season 4, the hatred between the two extends to their followers too, becoming a battle between two different ideologies and no longer being just on a personal level, making things infinitely worse.
To Queen Maeve. She was coerced into a fake relationship with him for years, which only created a lot of resentment toward Homelander. He killed a lot of people who had shown the slightest romantic interest in her and used Maeve to cover his tracks. By season 3, she is determined to kill him at any cost, nearly dying herself in the process.
Arc Words: "Scorched earth", a term Homelander uses throughout Season 3 to illustrate his inevitable (and likely destructive) final showdown with Billy Butcher.
Armor-Piercing Response: He has a few of these, to let others know he's always watching them.
The Deep: I've always tried to help sir.
Homelander: You mean like when you ran away from Herogasm? Or maybe when you fucked an octopus?
Arrogance Breeds Laziness: As revealed in The Boys: Diabolical, Homelander (though not without some understandable mistakes) was capable of showing skill and restraint with Super-Strength and Super-Speed, even disarming the eco-terrorists of their guns with his speed without turning any of them into paste upon contact. By the start of the series, however, decades of being protected by Vought International for his many screw-ups and growing insanity have degraded Homelander from his prior restraint, as he rarely showed the same Speed Blitz from his younger years aside from saving Butcher at the end of Season 1. As the series progresses, Homelander just keeps getting worse at channeling his power correctly.
Astonishingly Appropriate Appearance: You know how Superman doesn't wear gloves? Homelander does, and they're bright red. Given his aspirations to be a dictator and whipping up his followers into violent frenzies, he's literally and metaphorically got blood on his hands.
Attention Whore: Homelander lives to bask in the attention the masses give him in an attempt to make up for the loving childhood he never had.
When Stormfront steals the spotlight for killing a Supe terrorist in Season 2, he's absolutely livid and spends her entire speech giving her a Death Glare.
This chink in his armor is also how Butcher ultimately survives a direct confrontation with him in the Season 2 finale; even with Butcher in a position where Homelander could easily kill him and steal back Ryan, the very threat of Maeve exposing him and thus losing all of his adoring fans is enough to completely pacify him.
He can't even stand his own son having more attention than him. When Vought is faking Ryan having his first saving in front of the naive bystanders, Homelander appears out of nowhere despite not appearing at all in the script.
He's noticeably bothered when Victoria Neuman manages to gain support for their planned coup of the United States by delivering a far better speech than his at Tek Knight's party.
Ax-Crazy: Hell yes. Homelander is a ball of barely-controlled rage and utter contempt for anyone he sees as weak—which is basically everybody. He's very violent and loves murdering people whenever he's not being watched. And as the series progresses, the depths of his mental instability only become more and more apparent, to the point that by Season 3, he'll now lash out in a murderous fit the moment someone so much as looks at him wrong.
Badass Boast: He is good at giving them, but one that stands out in particular is telling Soldier Boy he is the upgrade when the latter suggested that Homelander is a knock off of him.
Badass Cape: Subverted. He has a fancy cape that has the American flag motif embedded on it, but it flops behind him, and he has to move it out of the way whenever he wants to sit down.
Bad Boss: Having Homelander as your boss can be life-risking. In Season 4, he kills Anika before even letting her finish her sentence, and in the finale, he orders the assassination of everyone in Vought who may know sensitive information about The Seven. Even Ashley's name is casually written on the kill list despite being his most valuable underling.
The Bad Guy Wins:
By the end of Season 3, Homelander pretty much got everything he could have asked for–he's ousted Stan Edgar and became the new leader of Vought, he has the Vice Presidential Candidate and one of the few Supes who could pose a threat to him in his corner, he has his son Ryan back who is now falling in with his philosophy, and he no longer has to fear what the public thinks of him because he's built up such a Cult of Personality that they'll love him even when he literally kills someone in broad daylight.
Courtesy of Sister Sage's meticulous planning, Homelander ends Season 4 having achieved his goal of absolute control over the United States. While not technically sworn in as the ruler, it nevertheless stands as President Calhoun is little more than a Puppet King enforcing Homelander's Super Supremacist agenda.
Bad People Abuse Animals: Homelander never abuses animals himself, but he will absolutely order others to do it, such as when he ordered the Deep to eat his octopus best friend as a condition to get back in the Seven.
Bait the Dog:
In the first episode, we're told that he's one of the few superheroes who aren't horrible, and he genuinely seems like a Nice Guy based on his first interactions with Starlight. Then the episode ends with him destroying a private airplane of a mayor who threatened to blackmail Vought mid-flight, with his family on board, in order to protect the company's secrets... And he gets worse from there.
When Ashley presents Blindspot as a possible new member of the Seven, Homelander seems delighted by the young hero and compliments him on overcoming his blindness. With a seemingly friendly demeanor, Homelander feigns interest in Blindspot before slamming both his hands into Blindspot's ears, causing irreparable damage to his ears. Blindspot screams in agony as he bleeds out from the ears, while Ashley looks at him in terror and shock.
Bastard Bastard: His biological father is Soldier Boy, who never even knew the egg donor who gave birth to him. Also, his birthmother is an unnamed poor runaway who died giving birth to him after he accidentally lasers his way out of her womb as a newborn.
Beam-O-War: Has a heat vision clash with Butcher in "Herogasm". Soldier Boy interrupted the struggle before any victor could emerge.
The Beard: Possibly. He and Maeve used to date, but whether Maeve had any genuine romantic interest, did it to improve her brand (on her own or at Vought's "suggestion"), or to appear straight is open for debate. She had at least one relationship with a woman, and is later confirmed to be bisexual.
Beauty Equals Goodness: Homelander is deliberately advertised as such by Vought. He is the most handsome supe in the world; therefore, he is a good person too. While he has the perfect, all-American aesthetics, handsome, confident, and charming, his physical beauty just masks his dark, manipulative, and rotten core. He fits the "heroic ideal" in appearance but is the complete opposite in behavior, using his charm and good looks to manipulate his fanbase, maintain control, and instill fear.
Beauty Is Bad: He's handsome and cultivates the image of a charming all-American superhero, and what is best for him is that many people are still blind to what kind of person he is because of this trope.
Beauty Is Never Tarnished: Deconstructed in Season 3. Homelander never experienced even a bruise until his fight with Soldier Boy. And this being Homelander, any injury brought to his body means that he is not as strong or perfect as he thinks he is, which is something his massive ego cannot handle. Maeve takes a good laugh at seeing Homelander injured for the first time, and it gives her hope that he is not as infallible as he seems.
Became Their Own Antithesis: Homelander started as a young man believing in heroism, morality, and protection. However, over the years he became the complete opposite of those ideals. Between Stillwell grooming him, Black Noir covering his mistakes in missions teaching him there are no consequences for his wrongdoings, and humiliations from Vought, he turned to tyranny, manipulation, and unchecked power, becoming a symbol of everything he was meant to fight against. His journey is a deconstruction of his original purpose, turning him into the very threat he was created to oppose.
Be Careful What You Wish For: At the end of Season 3, Homelander finally gets to live with his son, is the man in charge of Vought International, and is unconditionally loved by his Hometeamers. By Season 4, however, he unsurprisingly comes to regret it fast:
After all, Ryan is nothing like him which frustrates Homelander, who is shown to be jealous of his son's youth and popularity due to Age Insecurity and being an Attention Whore, and refuses to tolerate the idea of Ryan standing on his own as a superhero unless it's to show that he's the reason why Ryan exists.
Everyone left in Vought is an unqualified Yes-Man because they fear Homelander's wrath, something that frustrates him to no end.
He also isn't quite satisfied with the love from his Hometeamers as he needs everyone to love him.
Becoming the Mask: He admits he used to have a secret identity a long, long time ago, but gave it up. Vogelbaum was the only person who still referred to him by his "real" name, John. After his death in Season 2 and those of the other scientists from his childhood in Season 4, no one is left that remembers Homelander before he became a living corporate product.
Being Evil Sucks: While Homelander is not shown regretting any of his evil deeds, he is troubled in his sleep by what he's done. In Season 4, he dreams of the events of the last three seasons which imply all those things affect him on a psychological level.
Being Tortured Makes You Evil: Subverted. While Homelander was tortured and experimented on throughout much of his childhood, these experiences alone did not make him evil. Flashbacks reveal that, as a young man around 18 years old, he was kind and full of promise. However, the combination of being groomed, manipulated, and having his deep-seated need for love exploited ultimately twisted him into the dangerous, god-complexed maniac he becomes as an adult. His descent into madness stems from psychological manipulation and power rather than the direct effects of his torture. Interestingly, he later takes brutal revenge on the scientists responsible for the suffering they inflicted on him.
Beneath the Mask: Tries to look like a Nice Guy and a born leader full of confidence. He is actually a sadistic bully who craves affection and worries a lot about being perceived as a fraud or weak.
Berserk Button:
A major one is lying to him. Don't insinuate that he's incapable of handling bad news with maturity, even though he's a Psychopathic Manchild.
On the flip side, he also hates being spoken too bluntly and by people who make clear they aren't interested in flattering his ego, barely restraining himself from lashing out at Stan Edgar and Sister Sage when they openly show they aren't impressed by him in the slightest.
He doesn't care for being reminded about how much he depends on the praise and attention of others or, really, how much he needs people in general. He looks set to immolate Stormfront on the spot when she labels his need to appeal to every demographic group as pathetic.
The mere idea that someone else might be more powerful than him or able to do stuff that he can't seriously gets to him as evidenced by his desire to kill Soldier Boy to assert dominance, increased even more after Soldier Boy actually beats him in a fight.
Beware the Superman: While most Supes and a majority of the Seven are subject to this, Homelander is easily the most notorious and oppressive one. It's not just that he has so much power that hardly anyone could physically stand up to him, but he's disturbingly demented, manipulative, vainglorious and callous towards everyone around him and very willing to use violence to deal with his problems, which only further adds to the amount of fear he inspires.
Beyond Redemption: Despite being aware of his horrific upbringing, everyone who opposes Homelander considers him completely irredeemable.
Beyond the Impossible: Until Soldier Boy, it was universally believed that Homelander is impossible to harm, let alone to kill. Maeve was both shocked and overjoyed to discover that Homelander had a bruise from his fight with Soldier Boy, which gave her enough courage to fight him on her own, and even managed to impale his ear with a metal rod.
Be Yourself: Deconstructed. In Season 3, Homelander snaps at his own birthday party, where he tells the world that he is fed up with being a product, he is done being apologetic for having powers, and is peeved with saying others are the real heroes when he is the one with powers and doing the dirty job. And the people react positively to his speech, making Homelander realize that he could have been himself from the very beginning and not Vought's puppet. So yeah, he is going to be himself from now on, because the people also embrace his godhood in a way. Seeing how being himself means "being a Psychopathic Manchild with a god complex". In the Season 3 finale, Homelander outright murders a civilian in public in front of hundreds of his supporters, and instead of being hated for it, they cheer for him and applaud him for it, ensuring that Homelander will continue to embrace his true psychopathic self knowing it doesn't matter. He'll be loved regardless.
Big Bad: Homelander is the overall main antagonist of the series as the leader of the Seven and the one responsible for a majority of the show's atrocities, from Becca's rape to the Supe terrorists. Many of the other villains — Madelyn Stillwell, Stan Edgar, and Stormfront — try to use him to further their own goals, but he always eclipses them, whether by merely outliving them or actively working against them to rise in power at Vought.
Big Bad Duumvirate:
In Season 2, he forms an alliance with one of the new members of the Seven, Stormfront, a Nazi white supremacist and the former wife of Frederick Vought who seeks to use him as the figurehead of a superhuman uprising.
Season 4 has him recruit Sister Sage to help his Super Supremacist plot and stir up some real chaos among the masses. While she is technically his "right-hand-bitch" as Firecracker puts it, her intelligence and tactical mind proves essential for him setting his plans into motion. While this seemingly ends in "The Insider" when he fires her upon learning that she lied to him about A-Train being the leaker, she returns in the season finale to reveal that almost everything that transpired was part of her plan to ensure he successfully took control of the United States, establishing that without her planning, he would not have come out on top.
Big Bad Ensemble:
Season 3 sees him engineer a coup to take control of Vought in all but name, forcing Butcher to ally with the unstable Soldier Boy (also his biological father) to stand a chance of finally killing him.
Homelander is set to share the role of main antagonist with Billy Butcher in Season 5, following the latter's Face–Heel Turn. While Homelander and his newly founded Super Supremacist dictatorship are taking over America, Butcher abandons the team and takes the Cardosa Virus in order to wipe out all Supes in the world, officially becoming a threat on par with Homelander.
Big Bad Wannabe: Downplayed. While he's certainly physically intimidating, his lack of foresight combined with his childishness means he can be effortlessly manipulated by others, such as Stan Edgar and Stormfront, and the very threat of Maeve ruining his credibility is enough to cow him into submission. Season 3 sees this subverted; tired of being manipulated, Homelander overthrows Stan Edgar and takes over Vought, gets his son back, gains a strong following among the regular people after his mental breakdown on live, and confronts Soldier Boy at Herogasm after initially having even a panic attack about his return. In Season 4, he recruits Sister Sage to plan a way for him to take over the whole country.
Big Fish in a Bigger Ocean: Homelander is certainly the strongest of his kind and feared by everyone who knows him but he's never really been challenged before or met an opponent who poses a threat to him.
He's intrigued by Billy Butcher because the man hates him so much that he is not afraid of him and he was initially intimidated by Stormfront because she was more popular than him and had a way of manipulating others. Homelander repeatedly points out that there is nobody stronger than him and the only thing keeping him on a leash is public admiration and Vought.
This is best shown when he fights Soldier Boy and Butcher, Homelander tries to cut the fight short by using his eye beams on Butcher as his first attack but gets upset when he realizes that Butcher has taken V-24 to level the playing field, causing Homelander to call him out for "cheating". When he's beaten into submission and restrained by Butcher, Hughie, and Soldier Boy, Homelander frantically frees himself and flies away. As a result of his pride, Homelander never actually took a fight seriously and never developed a strategy beyond using his eye beams and a single punch to end fights because he always believed himself to be an apex predator.
Bigot with a Crush: He's openly disdainful of non-Supes behind closed doors, but he speaks very fondly of his "encounter" with Becca. That said, Becca makes it clear that whatever happened between them was non-consensual.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Homelander maintains a smiling, friendly All-American persona in public, but he's anything but. Best exemplified when he meets Blindspot and gives the handicapped hero an affable welcome, then casually murders him horribly out of nowhere to prove a point.
Blasphemous Boast: When one poor victim mentions "God" in a plea, Homelander remarks that "the only man in the sky is me."
Blind Obedience: He expects those who are part of the Seven and Vought to be completely loyal to him and never question his decisions. This is deconstructed in Season Four, as even he gets tired of Deep's and Ashley's butt-kissing. But despite this frustration, he still does not like being contradicted, something Sage points out to him. When he discovers she withheld crucial information from him, he kicks her out.
Bloodbath Villain Origin: To think that Homelander became a villain only after what happened in "One Plus One Equals Two", when he was a young adult. He accidentally killed all the hostages because he mistook Black Noir as someone sent to kill him, thanks to Stillwell feeding his paranoia. By the end of the episode, he is covered in everyone's blood.
Blood Is the New Black: Homelander spends most of the Season 2 finale covered in blood from head to toe and remains this way until the end of the conflict between The Boys and Stormfront. In season 4, he takes bloody revenge on the scientists who raised him and leaves the lab covered in gore.
Blood-Splattered Warrior: A very dark example. When he departs his "childhood home" of Vought's lab, he kills every scientist save for Barbara and leaves her locked up with the carnage. Homelander is drenched from head to toe in blood and looking utterly satisfied and at ease with himself.
Bondage Is Bad: His sexual relationship with Stormfront features lots of violence towards each other and their surroundings. On the flipside, his sterile, nurture-deprived upbringing contributed both to his sociopathy as well as a breastfeeding kink that, after settling for the bottle for three seasons, made him enter an adult nursing relationship with Firecracker in season 4.
Boomerang Bigot: Homelander is an unapologetic Super Supremacist and is unofficially the world's firstborn Supe, yet both of his birthparents were never Supes to begin with, with Soldier Boy growing up as an adult before getting Compound V in his system and his unnamed birthmother being a homeless runaway. Also, the nature of Homelander's birth and upbringing wasn't exactly natural either due to him being a Designer Baby Raised in a Lab, never mind the damning fact that Supes only exist due to a Super Serum.
Born Winner: Unlike other Supes, he wasn’t just given Compound V, he was created in a lab, designed from the start to be the perfect, most powerful being. His son is even more straighter example.
Brains and Brawn: The Brawn to Sage's Brains in Season 4, though he is too prideful to admit it. Homelander is so powerful that everyone knows the army would not be able to stop him if he kills someone and resists arrest, so he can leverage that to be in a position of leadership. However, he killed or alienated so many competent people that he doesn't have a reliable team to lead around, so he recruits Sage, promising he will give her plenty of opportunities to shape the country how she wants to, as long as he also wants it.Despite his best efforts to sabotage his own plan Sage is able to work around it to make him de facto ruler of the United States, he is able to mobilize the Supes to arrest most of the Boys and enforce the martial law.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: Deconstructed.
Homelander always considered Stan Edgar his father figure and secretly wanted his attention, a thing Stan himself points out, but Stan is a ruthless businessman and considers Homelander just a bad product. Soldier Boy's father was emotionally abusive toward his own son and always considered him weakling, even after becoming a Supe, and then, Soldier Boy himself becomes abusive toward Homelander and calls him weak and pathetic for showing emotional vulnerability and genuinely wanting to form a family with him and Ryan. There is also Butcher who yells at Ryan for killing Becca, even if his intention was to Break His Heart to Save Him out of fear that he may negatively influence Ryan. But John breaks the cycle by making Ryan feel wanted and loved for the way he is. His speech to Ryan about how he will always be there for Ryan and love him no matter what is a good message for any child to hear if only it weren't for the "there are no consequences for God-like being like us'' subtext.
Further deconstructed in Season 4. He is indeed kind and patient with Ryan, but he still manipulates him to keep him by his side and has trouble connecting with him. What's worse, he's not above losing his patience with Ryan when the latter still keeps his empathy for their "toys" and retains his love for Butcher.
Bridal Carry: For the sake of spectacle, after publicly declaring Starlight as his girlfriend, Homelander offers to carry her while flying to their so-called "date," much to the cheers of their fans. However, what he meant was for Starlight to see Supersonic's mutilated body as a warning.
Bright Is Not Good: Appears to be a Primary-Color Champion, with a blue costume, red and white cape, and gold decorations, but is in fact a dangerous, unstable psychopath.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Homelander, his mommy issues and sociopathic behavior aside, is shown to be a cunning strategist and manipulator, far more so than his comic book counterpart. He's also the most powerful Supe on the planet, but he is shown to be quite lazy and callous with how he stops criminals when there aren't cameras rolling, almost exclusively using his Eye Beams to deal with his enemies. His laziness with his eye beam usage is what would end up causing the Flight 37 disaster to play out like it does, carelessly destroying the plane's control panel while killing the terrorist, when he could have easily gotten up close and killed him with his super strength. It's shown that he can control his eye beams with precision, even using them to heat up his food so there's no excuse that he can't control himself. Similarly, a later attempt to give himself a cheap and easy boost in approval ratings by eliminating a Supe terrorist backfires when his usual resort to Eye Beams accidentally kills a bystander — which ends up being recorded and uploaded to the web.
Season 3 shows that he is a capable combatant too if he is pushed enough by a real threat. He fought Soldier Boy, Billy, and Hughie and had the upper hand until they overpowered him together, and even then, he managed to escape. He also easily ousts Edgar from the company and gets a mole in the White House thanks to a couple of well-placed threats. As he told Starlight he could destroy the United States by hitting key infrastructures fast and hard enough no one could mount a defense before he was done with his onslaught if he had nothing to lose.
Broken Ace: America's most celebrated superhero, the world's strongest man, no vices, charming and handsome, yet also suffering from memories of his abusive childhood, endless mental issues, and is an unredeemable Super Supremacist. Worse, Homelander is just getting more unstable each season.
Broken Pedestal:
While he and Stormfront managed to mostly turn it around, a lot of the public felt this way about him after he was caught on camera killing an Innocent Bystander while fighting a supe terrorist. There was even a crowd of people protesting him at the Seven Tower. His crappy attempt to acknowledge it didn't help.
He is also this to Starlight, although in a more downplayed way. While she wasn't as big a fan of him as she was of Queen Maeve and The Deep, she at the very least respected him. By the midpoint of Season 2, she spends every waking moment at Seven Tower terrified he'll kill her, and by Season 3, she hates him so much she stops fearing him. Subverted for Hughie, who had already become disillusioned by the Seven and superheroes as a whole before learning how bad Homelander really is.
The Bully: Behind his Physical God status, he's pretty much a grown-up bully who revels in the fear and suffering of others and is impotent in the face of those he can't intimidate or kill. He ramps it up hard in Season 3.
After Edgar makes Annie co-captain, he takes it out on A-Train, fat-shaming him and then threatening him when he replies "fuck you" under his breath.
After finding out Stormfront killed herself, he forces a suicidal young woman he was supposed to rescue to kill herself, even after she changes her mind.
He re-recruits the Deep as a power move on Annie, then forces her to pretend to be his (Homelander's) girlfriend.
He welcomes the Deep back by having a seafood dinner and then forces him to eat his friend Timothy (an octopus) alive, knowing full well Deep can hear the octopus talk and beg for mercy.
His initial deal with Sister Sage had her working behind the scenes. When Sage dared to disagree with him openly about how to advertise Ryan, he punished her by having her wear spandex and put her in front of the cameras.
But I Can't Be Pregnant!: Everyone, including Homelander himself, thought he was infertile, so it was unprecedented when it turned out he impregnated Becca with Ryan.
The Caligula: Homelander bullies and threatens everyone, and is completely ineffectual in leading Vought. It doesn't help that he takes over when his mental stability is particularly low.
Call-Back: In his explanation for his future goals for humanity to Sage, he mentions wanting to leave behind "something pure, cleansed, like marble" for his son. Those are the same words his evil alter ego used in Herogasm to describe killing Homelander's humanity completely.
Can't Kill You, Still Need You: Maeve asks Homelander why he didn't kill her despite her betrayal and chose her as his captive. Homelander answers that he plans to harvest her eggs and create descendants with her. Now, this doesn't mean he cares if she dies trying to stop that from happening.
Can't Take Criticism: Homelander is obsessed with how popular he is and reacts poorly to criticism, justified or not.
The Cape: Is a straight Superman Substitute, and at first, even Butcher admits that he's the only hero who seems to be the real deal. As expected from the premise, Homelander turns out to be one of the most conniving of the supers, in conjunction with being a Flying Brick, having an All-American Face and the leader of The Seven, he is casually able to switch between charmingly dorky and sadistic in an instant. Starlight, as a Wide-Eyed Idealist and up-and-comer, is more of a traditional example.
Cape Snag: Soldier Boy mocks Homelander's cape before their fight, and backs up his criticism by grabbing an airborne Homelander with it before slamming him into the ground.
Captain Geographic: Wears a suit of red and blue, a cape modeled after the American flag, and has gold pauldrons shaped like bald eagles. They don't call him Homelander for nothing.
Captain Patriotic: He appears like this, the leader of the team wearing an American flag as a cape. Subverted in that, privately, he doesn't seem to really care about America at all. Double Subverted with his more exploitative nature of it; America is what's getting Supes involved in the military, and he mockingly states that "camel-jockeys" will recite his name in "perfect American."
Carpet of Virility: Homelander has a lot of chest hair, but he is not the badass sexy type. While Homelander believes in hypermasculinity, he is a man-child with mental disorders and a kink for milk.
Cartwright Curse: This being Homelander, his relationships with his "love interests" are expected to be twisted.
He has a sexual relationship with Stillwell, full of subtext. She ends up killed by him for lying about the existence of his son.
Then Homelander has another relationship with Stormfront, and for the first time he is genuinely happy and in love. She doesn't die, but still ends up fried alive by his own son, and eventually commits suicide by biting out her own tongue. Homelander is genuinely heartbroken over her fate.
And finally Becca Butcher, whom he abused and gave birth to his son, Ryan. She dies being accidentally wounded by Ryan, after he tried to save her from Stormfront.
And lately he added Queen Maeve to the list too. She actually fakes her death to go and live a peaceful life with Elena.
Subverted only with Starlight because he wants to torment her.
Casual Danger Dialogue: Deconstructed. The casual way he reacts to violence and disaster isn't to show how cool or level-headed he is, but how little he takes the situation seriously. Best seen during the plane crash, where he reacts to the destroyed control panel and the fact everyone on board will die horribly the way the usual snarky superhero would.
Catchphrase: "You guys are the real heroes", or some variation of it. The majority of his appearances with a crowd of people has him dropping this line at least once, even when a situation is completely against his favor. It becomes apparent very quickly that this is blatantly an empty feelgood platitude fabricated by Vought for as a PR tool for easy positive reactions, and it's one he himself does not believe. Him casting it away on his televised birthday meltdown, saying it was always bullshit and that he's the real hero, not them, is symbolic of him being done with the façade and that he's refusing to be a Slave to PR any longer. His other catchphrase that he genuinely believes in and begins to use more often is at the top of the page.
Cerebus Call-Back: Many of his frailties such as his need for affection and approval, as well as his quasi-Oedipus Complex, initially serve to make Homelander look pathetic, weak, and hypocritical. It transpires in the fourth season that these were deliberately chiseled into his mind by Vought to create a reliably exploitable vulnerability they could use to control him.
The Chain of Harm: Homelander was tortured, experimented and sexually exploited from a young age, fueling his need to inflict suffering on others. Every parental figure he ever had abused him in a way or another, but he is determined to stop the cycle to himself and never submit his own son to such things.
Character Blog: On June 14, 2024, he did an official Reddit AMA.
Character Development: He goes through mostly malignant growth from a smug but confident Bitch in Sheep's Clothing to an egomaniacal Supe supremacist with very little provocation towards resorting to violence. That said, he does have some positive development in Season 4, when he gets his vengeance on the scientists that tortured him as a child. The next episode has him try to be a more attentive and nonjudgmental father to Ryan (even if the result is twisted), though it ultimately doesn't last long.
Character Exaggeration: In the comics, whatever angst that Homelander has regarding his Dark and Troubled Past is glossed over by his Sanity Slippage of Black Noir's gaslighting. In the show, Homelander's past and the psychological damage it left him are one of the highlights of his character.
Characterization Marches On: In Season 1, Homelander had a silver tongue that allowed him to walk out of situations that unexpectedly went south for him and largely kept his emotions in check. Starting with Season 2, he's largely lost said silver tongue, getting easily flustered whenever caught off guard and reacting violently to anything that upset him to the point that by the final season, all of his subordinates have a bottomless fear of displeasing him. This can partially be attributed to his growing Sanity Slippage and repeated Villainous Breakdowns.
Character Tics: Whenever he's pissed off, he clenches and unclenches his jaw.
Chick Magnet: Over the course of the show, three female characters have shown romantic and sexual interest in him in very disturbing ways. Madelyn cultivated a disturbing sexual interest with incest subtext in Homelander way before he was even 18, Stormfront is mostly attracted to him for being an Aryan-looking Ubermench, and Firecracker is shown being obsessed with him.
Childish Villain, Mature Hero: The childish, petulant, and entitled behavior of Homelander is most clearly contrasted with Starlight. While Homelander acts impulsively, selfishly, and with a constant need to assert dominance, complete with his manchild tantrums and fetish for milk, Starlight demonstrates maturity, patience, and composure. A perfect example occurs in Season 3 when Stan Edgar calls both Annie and Homelander in the meeting room: Homelander immediately rushes toward the central chair, intent on asserting control, but Stan reaches it first, leaving him frustrated. In contrast, Starlight casually walks over and sits in a different chair, without the need for dramatic posturing.
Clark Kenting: In Season 4, he wears for the first time normal clothing to disguise himself as a mere person in public. Sage still recognizes him when he appears at her door.
Cold Ham: Anytime Anthony Starr appears on screen. One moment he'll be quiet and reserved, and the next moment he'll blow up. Regardless, anything and everything he does is full of ham, and it's glorious.
Comical Overreacting: Homelander goes ballistic and nearly lasers A-Train over a simple “Fuck you”. Made even funnier by the fact that despite A-Train saying it barely loud enough for even the audience to hear, Homelander hears it just fine because of his super hearing.
Conditioned to Be Weak: Homelander is the central antagonist of the series and the driving force behind Butcher's hatred of superhumans. Homelander was raised to be a living product of Vought through isolation and scientific experiments. As a result, he craves external validation and cannot afford to look weak, something Vought exploits because they know how dangerous Homelander is and his utter disregard for human life. As the series progresses, Homelander is blackmailed by Starlight with video footage of him abandoning a passenger plane and threatening to kill everyone onboard. However, Homelander calls her bluff and says that if she uploads it, they've lost their leash on him and he can go on a rampage without anyone to stop him. He even takes over Vought and finds comfort in his demographic of white males, who unconditionally support him despite killing a Starlight protestor in front of them.
Barbara Findley: "I was there the day that you were born. They paid some poor runaway two grand to carry the embryo to term but you lasered her guts open from the inside. You rose in the air with your umbilical cord still attached, like some creature out of myth… or nightmare. You killed three doctors and a nurse while you were at it. And then, just trust me, it was downhill from there. So, yeah, yeah, everybody was terrified of you, from your first breath. We have no physical power over you. We never did. You could’ve broken out of here anytime you wanted. We couldn’t have stopped you but you didn’t because you couldn’t stand the idea that we would be disappointed in you. Your need for approval and for love, Vought brought in the best psychologists in the world. Developed the protocol to carefully engineer that need so that you would be obedient. In many ways, that was our greatest success."
Contemplative Boss: This is how he greets Starlight at her first official meeting with the Seven, to project an image of being a professional Reasonable Authority Figure.
Control Freak: Homelander in his eyes always knows best. He chafes at the talking points Vought gives him and insists on running his own agenda, purposely installing Ashley as the new puppet manager of the Seven so he will have complete control over the group. This extends to his personal relationships, as he treats others as his personal toys who exist solely to conform to his beliefs and give him love rather than actual people with their own personalities. When he slowly starts losing things to control in Season 2, he enters a massive, prolonged Villainous Breakdown. It's a sign of how bad things have gotten for him in Season 4 when he realizes he can't do everything by himself and seeks out Sister Sage because he needs capable allies, even listening to her advice half the time.
Cornered Rattlesnake: Played with. Being the strongest being alive with a giant corporation heralding him as the greatest thing in the world, Homelander's go-to move is to assert dominance, and when that tactic doesn't work or isn't an option, he tends to back down. However, his ego and trauma from his lonely background are strong enough that if pushed too far, he will stop cowering and lash out with all he has. He dares Starlight to release her blackmail material when he finally gets tired of it being hung over his head, pointing out that he can punish everyone else for her actions, and again when he chooses to fight Soldier Boy after identifying him, because while he doesn't want to fight someone near his level, if the public knows Soldier Boy is back Vought would go under from the scandal. When he nearly loses that fight (thanks to Butcher and Hughie helping), Homelander starts snarling and flees into the sky.
Corrupted Character Copy:
He’s a blatant Superman Substitute, but with a very dark twist. Homelander emphasizes why it was so important for Clark Kent to grow up on a farm with loving parents who could teach him the value of humanity, humility, and compassion. Otherwise, you get a nigh-indestructible, mentally disturbed Psychopathic Manchild with no sense of responsibility or impulse control.
He's one to Super-Soldier in gaining his powers through an experiment and being presented as an All Loving Captain Patriotic. But while Super-Soldier is only a Politically Incorrect Hero on the topic of Metamutants, Homelander is a Politically Incorrect Villain with a God Complex.
The Corrupter: He becomes this to his son, Ryan, at the end of Season 3, beginning to mold the boy into his sidekick.
The Corruptible: Homelander wasn't always evil and genuinely wanted to help people, but the trauma Vought inflicted on him and Stillwell's manipulation turned him into the sociopathic monster he is now.
Corruption of a Minor: Stillwell began manipulating and grooming John since he was a teen.
Create Your Own Hero: Hero is much said, but by raping Becca, he turned Butcher and the Boys into his enemies.
Create Your Own Villain:
His involvement with Flight 37 resulted in Indira Shetty's Start of Darkness. The deaths of her husband and child forced her to come up with a Final Solution against the Supes.
Happens also in a literal sense, as Homelander engineers a plan to distribute Compound V to the terrorists around the world and soup them up with the drug, creating supervillains for Vought to send the Seven after and justify Supes enlisting in the United States military.
Creepy Blue Eyes: Homelander always had an intense stare, but it's even worse in Season 3, which opens with him doing interviews about Stormfront and creepily staring at the camera like he is about to snap and go on rampant killing.
Crucified Hero Shot: Homelander adopts a cross-shape with his arms outstretched after giving a Rousing Speech at EXPO Believe. He even comes down to the people to touch him, symbolizing his messianic status.
Cruel and Unusual Death: Homelander is really fond of being on the giving end of this, taking great joy in using his feet to slowly crush the head of his victims, commit a drawn-out death on Supersonic, lasering anyone who slights him in gory detail, using his lasers to brutally cripple victims before killing them, forcing someone into committing suicide just because, and locking up someone in a man-sized microwave and then activating said microwave to slowly incinerate them. If Homelander wants someone to die, expect the hapless victim one of these.
Cruel Mercy:
He saves Billy from killing himself in a suicide attack so he can reveal not only is Becca still alive, but she's been raising his hated enemy's son all along and never told him about it.
Instead of killing Barbara for her mistreatment of him as a boy, as he did with all the others, he instead "spares her" by sealing her in the "bad room", surrounded by the mutilate bodies of the rest of the scientists.
Cruelty by Feet:
By the end of Season 1, the audience already knows that Homelander is likely a sociopath and narcissist, but what reveals him to be a sadist is him slowly crushing a helpless terrorist's skull under his foot for kicks. He smiles at the results.
After boxing Blindspot's ears so hard that it causes his ears to gush blood, Homelander shows how little he cares about the young supe's excruciating pain by casually stepping over him as if he isn't there while reprimanding Ashley for even considering "a cripple" as a new member of the Seven.
In "Herogasm", Homelander kills a shrunken and severely burnt Termite by squashing him under his heel on his way inside the mansion. While it may appear like an Accidental Murder at first, the fact that Homelander has super hearing implies that he could hear Termite's cries for help.
After lasering Marty's penis off (and leaving a massive, bloody hole in his midsection), he crushes his skull under his boot, very similar to how he executed the terrorist in the first season.
Cry Laughing: In the final of Season 2 after Ryan choses Billy over him, at the beginning of his breakdown, Homelander is about to cry but starts laughing as a way to cope with his insecurity.
Cult of Personality: By Season 4 he is forming one around himself with the help of Sage and Firecracker. He has got a lot of adulation from the extremists far right Americans and gains new followers everyday.
Curb-Stomp Cushion: As the series continues, it's apparent that while he is very much powerful, he's not outright unkillable or invincible: when he actually fights those who serve as a physical match to him, he has a poor track record, having lost to Butcher, Soldier Boy, and Hughie, and coming to a draw against Maeve. In both cases, he retreated from the fights due to either not wanting to die/lose his powers or due to other extenuating circumstances.
Cutting the Knot: Deconstructed. When dealing with his enemies, Homelander relies on the much faster solution of just cutting them to pieces with his heat vision and uses more violent attacks when he's feeling angry and sadistic. However, this has had detrimental effects on his publicity.
He uses his heat vision to kill a terrorist hijacker but fails to realize that he'll break the control console. Maeve and Starlight were able to blackmail him with the footage of him demanding Maeve to come with him.
He gets in trouble after accidentally killing a village child when he chooses to kill the African "Super Villain" with his heat vision.
In season 4, he kills Anika before she reveals wasn't the one who made the information public because she already admitted to being contacted by Starlight.
Daddy Had a Good Reason for Abandoning You: Homelander never knew he conceived a son while raping Becca. Once he learns about Ryan's existence, he does anything to gain his son by his side.
Dark and Troubled Past: The Boys: Diabolical digs a little more into Homelander's childhood and reveals that as a kid, he was heavily experimented on by Vought and was always treated like a guinea pig and not a being with emotions. He was cut open, forced to put his hand into an oven, thrown into an aquarium to test his resistance, and subjected to a brutal Training from Hell repeatedly. Season 4 elaborates on this, showing that among those other things, his entire body was also forced to withstand the heat of a massive oven, causing the boy agonizing pain, even though it didn't leave any physical injuries.
Dark Messiah:
Initially serves as this to Stormfront, who viewed him as a The Chosen One to lead her army of Aryan supes to take over the world.
In Season 3, Homelander steps completely into the territory of seeing himself as a literal god. He considers himself the only god in the sky, and compares himself to Jesus. By Episode 2, Homelander is finally fed up with being threatened by Starlight and Maeve, and being a Slave to PR. He snaps during his birthday party and tells the entire world he was never their equal and that they should be thankful he is there to watch over them. The people's answer is positive, not different from cultists.
In Season 4 he wants to create a world for Supes as he deems it unnatural for them to be ruled by insects. Sage advises him is better to spread chaos and than appear as the savior of humanity.
Deadpan Snarker: Homelander was always sharp-tongued, but usually preferred to be amicable for his public persona. By Season 3, pissed off by everything, roasting others to the point of bullying is his only way of communication.
Homelander: [to Ashley] Is your idiot brain getting fucked by stupid?
Dehumanization: On both giving and receiving ends of the trope. Homelander views non-Supes as "mud people" that in his eyes should be subjugated and declares himself the Master Race, as he's entitled to abuse anyone, including his fellow Supes within the Seven because he can. Matters not help by the fact that he's raised as a guinea pig by Vought's researchers into conditioning him into what he is now in the present.
Designer Babies: Homelander was born from the semen of Soldier Boy, and a homeless runaway who was paid two grand to carry the embryo to term. He was born with unbelievable powers, with him lasering his way out of his mother’s womb with his heat vision, killing her in the process. He was raised in a lab a good part of his childhood. Gen V reveals that Homelander's birth was part of Project Odessa to create God-tier Supes.
Desperately Craves Affection: As a result of being a lab rat and lacking any loving figure his whole life, John is a hero only because of his pathological need for praise and adoration. In his head, he is a god, and like any god, he is to be glorified, adored, and loved unconditionally.
Despotism Justifies the Means: Homelander only cares about acquiring power and installing himself and the supes as the master race, and he will stop at nothing to achieve it, including building an army of supes.
Destroy the Abusive Home: In Season 4, in one final attempt to distance himself from his troubled past, Homelander returns to the secret lab where he was raised only to destroy it and to kill all the scientists working there.
Destructo-Nookie: He and Stormfront end up doing this as part of their physically violent foreplay.
Didn't Think This Through:
While he is capable of making intelligent choices, a lot of his decision-making throughout the first season is plagued by him seeking short term solutions to problems without considering the potential long-term consequences, either due to him only wanting immediate emotional gratification or simply not bothering to think it through. The fallout from these decisions begin to pile up in the second season.
Killing Stillwell while she was being held hostage was not a well thought-out solution, nor finding a suitable replacement. Homelander was mad that she lied to him about his baby dying, and manipulating him. It turns out the main reason he had his good reputation was that Stillwell was putting out fires before they became a problem, ensuring he could remain the poster boy for Supes. When he "hires" Ashley to take her place and makes it clear that Ashley is just a puppet, his reputation starts taking a nosedive as the world catches glimpses of his true nature.
Outing Maeve during an interview was a miscalculation. As Maeve put it to Elena, she was willing to do anything to keep him from hurting Elena, but that act of spite and pettiness set the ball rolling to convince Elena that Maeve was complicit in Flight 37's disastrous crash, leading to their break up. After hitting a funk, Maeve realized that she actually had nothing to lose, what with being estranged from her family and not really having friends. She gained the willpower to ally with the Boys and blackmail Homelander.
Ousting Stan Edgar as head of Vought definitely qualifies. Homelander may be popular and charismatic but he has absolutely no idea how to actually run a business, let alone one as massive as Vought, and the other board members are so terrified of his instability that they are afraid to speak up or question his rule, putting the company in serious trouble.
The worst of the bunch is his planning a coup for the United States government. During Tek Knight's party, he tries to rally the guests over with his usual "Save America" agenda he used to rally his everyday supporters. But the business owners and officials instantly tell him to cut the rhetoric and ask him pointed questions about who will replace the government officials, the public and military's reactions, manage international business relations, etc. All Homelander can do is completely stumble and break down because he has absolutely nothing to offer nor planned that far ahead, showing he is just as incompetent in planning things for running a government as he is in trying to run Vought.
Like Anika, Homelander murders Webweaver out of the belief that he's The Mole upon his "confession" of giving Billy Butcher information. Sage points out that Webweaver was a junkie who would have said anything for a fix, and he was so addled during his interrogation that anyone could see he was a mess, and nowhere near capable of the competence that a mole would need. This should have been plainly obvious to Homelander, and it's implied that Patrick's heroin addiction is well-known in the Supe Community. But Homelander has become so violently paranoid at this point that he just blindly kills anyone who he thinks is against him and hopes for the best.
Then, Homelander eventually fires Sage from the Seven after keeping secrets from him regarding A-Train's status as The Mole and telling her that she's lucky to walk away alive and not "being sent home in a bucket". Luckily for him, Sage stayed loyal to him and worked on their plan despite him turning his back on her earlier.
Finally, Homelander tries to take advantage of holidays by having his son star in a Christmas special singing a not-so-subtle Far-right propaganda piece for a culture war with lyrics including reporting parents and friends if they are even suspected of being Antifa, and half-assing his attempts at comforting Ryan. While Homelander tries to appeal to Ryan's genuine desire to do good to ease him into corruption, his own impatience finally destroys his relationship with Ryan for good as the kid has had enough and implicitly renounced Homelander as his father ("she loved her husband Billy") on live TV.
Digging Yourself Deeper: When he tries to apologize for accidentally killing a civilian on video, leading to accusations of being a war criminal, he tries to downplay it and retain sympathy by making reference to this being the cost of war. His wording however makes the crowd (who were already there in protest of him) realise that he just admitted this has happened before and start actively declaring him a monster.
Dirty Coward:
Shows hints of this in Season 3 when Soldier Boy reappears. He's visibly nervous after watching the News footage of him destroying a building and killing 19 people, and when Starlight points out that Vought needs to move to find and apprehend him, Homelander fobs off the responsibility on her while using his position as CEO to avoid doing it himself, implying that the idea of fighting someone potentially as powerful as him frightens him.
Double Subverted when he decides to go and confront Soldier Boy and doesn't immediately flee, even when Soldier Boy gets backed up by Butcher and Hughie, only to flee in terror when Butcher, Soldier Boy, and Hughie manage to overpower and nearly kill him.
Disappointed in You: He's on the receiving end from his father Soldier Boy. Homelander genuinely wants a relationship with the older Supe and all but begs him to be his father, but Soldier Boy is disgusted with Homelander and what he views as his "weakness."
Disneyland Dad: During his short tenure of trying to be a father, Homelander and Stormfront take Ryan to a Vought-licensed amusement park in an effort to entertain and cheer the boy up. Unfortunately, they didn't expect the fact that large crowds and loud noises would cause great discomfort for the boy, forcing Homelander to take his son elsewhere.
Disproportionate Retribution:
It's hinted that his rape of Becca stemmed from Billy, at a Christmas party at Vought HQ, pointing out that Becca was basically doing his work for him on a Twitter account, as well as muttering some jokes at his expense to Becca.
When A-Train quietly says, "Fuck you" after being bullied by Homelander once again, the latter responds by nearly murdering him with his laser vision.
After discovering that Webweaver, a drug addict who is clearly not in the right state of mind, was leaking information to Butcher (with it being strongly implied that Butcher was actively feeding and taking advantage of his addiction to do so), Homelander proceeded to rip the poor guy in half with his bare hands.
The Dog Bites Back: When he visits the Vought scientists who experimented on him, he acts friendly but soon makes it clear he's there for revenge and subjects them to physical, mental, and emotional torture to satisfy his own need for catharsis. When the lead scientist, Barbara Findley, points out he could have left anytime he wanted and they instilled a desire for love into him, Homelander leaves her in his old punishment room that he's decorated with the viscera of every other scientist.
Do Not Call Me "Paul": He hates being called John by the scientists who raised and experimented on him. He corrects them every time they refer to him as John and demands to refer to him as Homelander. Given the context, Homelander demands to be called just "Homelander," to asserts control over his self-image and his attempts to distance himself from his troubled past that shaped him into the man he is today.
Double Take: At least twice.
The first is when Stormfront is espousing her Nazi views to Ryan, claiming that minorities are planning a "white genocide". Even Homelander finds this idea so absurd that he can't help but make a confounded face.
In Season 3, during his fight with Butcher and Soldier Boy, Hughie, hopped up on temporary Compound V, suddenly teleports into the room to join the fight. Homelander's face quickly turns to one of sheer confusion, but not because Hughie suddenly has superpowers; it's because he just dropped into the middle of a fight completely naked.
Draco in Leather Pants: In-Universe. Despite murdering a man in front of a huge crowd of people, his fans cheered for him. Even after this event, he stayed particularly popular with the conservative male population for his ultra-masculine, fiercely patriotic hero image.
The Dragon: Whilst he does act as a leader of The Seven, he is ultimately used by Vought and Stan Edgar to carry out their ideologies and orders.
Dragon-in-Chief: He's used as The Leader of The Seven by Vought and Stillwell, but Homelander is the most dangerous part of the organization and his butting heads with upper management hint they don't have him as reined in as they believe. He proves this true in the first season's finale when he personally kills Stillwell to take matters into his own hands. Stan Edgar briefly manages to rein him in, much to his displeasure, but he eventually ousts him from Vought and takes over the company himself.
Dramatically Missing the Point: Homelander stages a public rescue to bolster Ryan's image. However, when he finds Ryan crying afterwards in his apartment, Homelander completely misses the mark. He simply assumes Ryan's tears stem from embarrassment over his "acting." He tries to comfort him by telling him how Homelander's presence will help Ryan's popularity to increase and he just needs to be patient. Even Ryan can't help but let out a little "What?" at his father's misplaced attempt at comfort. Homelander's focus on himself is so blinding that he fails to grasp the real reason behind his son's tears. Ryan is crying because he accidentally took Koy's life during the staged rescue. He becomes disappointed that Ryan cries only for killing Koy and genuinely doesn't understand why Ryan is making such a huge deal out of it.
The Dreaded: Except for Butcher, Edgar, and Soldier Boy, everyone is scared of Homelander. Even Starlight, while able to stand up for herself and be confident towards the other members of the Seven, is scared silent almost any time Homelander scolds her. However, Maeve, Annie, and Hughie all become a lot less scared of him when they realize he's a manchild at heart and isn't as invulnerable as they once thought.
Dueling Messiahs: In Season 4, Homelander and Starlight are cast as opposing messianic figures, not just by their actions but by how their fanbases use them as symbols for their ideals. Homelander is worshipped by far-right zealots who see him as the savior of "traditional values" and a champion against progressive movements. In contrast, Starlight serves as his Good Counterpart, revered by left-leaning followers as a beacon of true heroism and justice. Their conflict reflects a broader cultural war, with each representing a polarizing ideal in a fractured society.
Due to the Dead: Even after killing Black Noir, Homelander, in a rant towards Ashley, The Deep, and A-Train, states that he mattered to the team more than any other member simply because he was the only member who stuck by Homelander's side without any ulterior motive. Until Soldier Boy showed and he knew of him being Homelander's father, of course.
Enemy Mine: He teams up with progressive politician Victoria Neuman in Season 3 to take down Stan Edgar in exchange for providing Nadia with a dose of Compound V for her daughter. This expands to helping her get into the White House so long as she drops her anti-Vought rhetoric.
Enraged by Idiocy: By Season 4, he is so sick of all the ass-kissing that he orders The Deep to give a blowjob to A-Train. Than he gets even angrier that neither The Deep or A-Train had the courage to oppose his orders.
Entitled to Have You:
He believes that he and Queen Maeve belong together because they are both powerful, take-charge supes superior to the unwashed masses and seems confused as to why they broke up, unaware that she finds his sociopathic tendencies off-putting. While both are willing to work professionally out in public, she becomes fully disillusioned with him when he allows everyone on Flight 37 to die and then remorselessly capitalizes on it.
It's implied that this was his rationale for raping Becca. Given that she worked for Vought, and that Homelander was basically her boss, it's suggested that in his twisted logic, he was "entitled" to do as he wished with his subordinate. Given Homelander's both carried on sexual relationships with other people at Vought, and brutalized several others, it's not a stretch.
Homelander displays this attitude toward Starlight to some level after forcing her into a fake relationship with him to boost his public image. He casually asks Hughie intimate questions about Starlight's sex life and even jokes that he and Starlight might end up sleeping together, a "joke" that, knowing Homelander, may not have remained one for long. Even more unsettling, he has the keys to her apartment in the Vought Tower and listens to her while she sleeps.
Equal-Opportunity Evil: Homelander might be a huge bigot with a God complex, but he doesn't exactly care about skin color or gender when he is recruiting someone if they can be useful to him. He personally recruits Sage, who is not only a woman, but an African American one at that.
Establishing Character Moment: Homelander is introduced casually murdering a pair of robbers despite the lack of threat they pose to him (granted, the robbers were threatening two boys a few seconds ago), using his Eye Beams to melt one guy's machine gun and causing him horrific pain before throwing another guy about twenty to forty feet in the air to land on a car. And then he dons his friendly mask for his public image's sake.
Et Tu, Brute?:
He takes Stormfront's suicide as an act of personal betrayal, especially since it was on his birthday. He is also genuinely hurt that Black Noir would abandon him right after Homelander personally confided in him. When Noir admits he knew he had a father alive the whole time Homelander starts crying.
He has a complete meltdown for the simple fact Ryan visited Butcher behind his back. He goes on a complete rant about Ryan not loving him the way he wants after everything he has done and ends up throwing a statuette in a mirror.
In his own hypocritical and delusional way, Homelander felt so betrayed by A-Train being the leak that his reaction was to cry. At this point, he should realize A-Train had every right to betray him and Vought after everything A-Train has been through at the hands of Homelander, but he genuinely doesn’t know any better. His ego is so inflated he thinks the way he treats people and does things is somewhat normal.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
In a rather twisted sense, he did love Stormfront and Ryan, his son. However, with Ryan, it bordered on a platonic Yandere-like sense, as he murdered Vought employees when he found out that they were working with Butcher in taking Ryan away from him. He also claims to genuinely love Maeve, but what extent to which this is true clearly comes from an Entitled to Have You mentality.
He genuinely likes and appreciates Black Noir and considers him a friend. Homelander does kill Noir when he finds out he'd been keeping Soldier Boy being his father from him, but he's clearly heartbroken about it and still speaks of Noir respectfully afterwards.
Subverted with Stillwell. While Butcher and Mallory believed Stillwell was the only one Homelander had any affection for, Homelander murders her himself after Butcher takes her hostage, having found out that she lied to him about Becca miscarrying his son. That said, he appears to be at least a little anguished by the decision, and forces Doppelganger to masquerade as Stillwell after her death to play out his disturbing sexual fantasies about her.
He initially holds sincere affection when confronted with the fact that Soldier Boy is his father, opening up to another human being (aside from his son) in earnest. However, when Soldier Boy attempts to kill him for being a disappointment and critically injuries Ryan, all bets are off.
He seems to have had a genuine fondness for Maeve, as he repeatedly asked her to back down during their final fight and told her that he didn't want to hurt her. He only stopped holding back once her blows started to draw blood.
Even Evil Has Standards:
Played With in his association with Stormfront, a literal Nazi. He's a monster who has a very America-First mindset and a Social Darwinist, but he's shown to be uncomfortable by Stormfront's overt Nazi and white supremacist attitudes. It's later revealed that it's not that he doesn't support these ideas - he's frequently shown himself to be an immensely racist bigot (e.g. not allowing a blind person or a Muslim into the Seven) - it's that he doesn't need or want a "master race" since he sees himself as a master race. With that said, he does distance himself from her ideologies even behind closed doors and it's made clear he's very uncomfortable with her trying to instill these beliefs into his son Ryan. It can be safe to assume that Homelander Hates Everyone Equally and therefore would find her racial supremacy baffling, which is backed up by the fact he shows non-Supes like Billy Butcher or Stan Edgar respect and has loathing for Supes even within his group. He also has a close friendship with Black Noir, who is a mute and facially deformed black man. Even after killing Noir, he genuinely mourns his death and cries after realizing Noir had never told him about Soldier Boy both being alive and his father.
Homelander also does not appear to regard the natural social hierarchy as being determined by race but between Supes and normal humans. Homelander commends Victoria Neuman (played by an actress of Lebanese descent) for "choosing her own kind" by siding with Homelander over Stan Edgar. He genuinely regarded Black Noir as his closest friend, openly telling the Deep and A-Train that Noir was worth more than them (and Ashley) combined. Homelander also greatly respects (and even somewhat fears) Stan Edgar, while Stormfront dismisses Edgar simply because of his race, to Homelander's irritation. Homelander uses racist terms and exhibits the xenophobic tendencies of an extreme nationalist, but racial distinctions are much less important to him than the distinction between Supe and human.
Subverted in his treatment of Maeve in Season 3. He scoffs at the idea of raping her... but still plans to harvest her eggs to create perfect super babies.
After daydreaming about massacring a crowd protesting his accidental murder of an African child, he appears to be somewhat upset at the prospect of doing so. Although he isn't disgusted at the idea, he doesn't appear to take pleasure from violence he views as unnecessary (although he could be upset at the idea of being alone without adoration).
Upon being told by Vogelbaum that his child, the result of raping Becca Butcher, drowned in its mother's blood, he seems genuinely shocked and saddened by this. Not to mention, he condemns Vogelbaum for treating him like a "lab rat" growing up. Furthermore, he is angered upon learning that his son Ryan is being kept in isolation because he doesn't want him to go through the same childhood he had.
In the Season 3 finale, after killing a protester for throwing a bottle at Ryan, even Homelander seems a bit weirded out at first at how fast his fans start cheering him, though he quickly buys into it.
In the Season 4 premiere, he and Butcher have a brief confrontation, in which Homelander realizes that Butcher is terminally ill due to his abuse of Compound V. While Homelander doesn't show compassion to him (not that he has the capacity), he implicitly admits that he'll miss having Butcher as his Worthy Opponent once he's gone, saying that he wanted to have their "last dance" and is disappointed that they won't have the chance.
He winces at Firecracker's anti-vaccine spiel and such. Homelander is fine spinning outrageous lies to rally his supporters but he doesn't really respect them believing it.
Homelander is certainly willing to kill anyone who gets in his way, including children, but he directly calls out the scientists who tortured him during season 4, saying that he was a just a child and that they knew it was wrong. This is evident by the way he treats his son Ryan, as he makes it clear that he is completely against giving Ryan the childhood that he had, raised in a lab without loving parents. This is muddled by the fact that he does mistreat Ryan emotionally, but this is likely a case of Blue-and-Orange Morality, as it appears that Homelander recognizes child abuse is wrong, but his sense of what is abusive is extremely skewed.
He's visibly uncomfortable with just how in detail The Deep goes regarding just who he's willing to sell out (that is to say, everyone) for the sake of saving his own skin, even showing said discomfort while being sycophantically fawned over by the latter.
In the trailer for Season 5, he's also shocked when Soldier Boy his own father asks him if he molested him while he was unconscious.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: Justified. Not having been raised in a familial environment and being starved for affection, he believes that his son is going to immediately love him and side against the mother who's been raising him his entire life.
He even responds to Billy Butcher defending Ryan because he made a promise to Becca, despite his personal feelings with confused weeping and maniacal laughter. General decency and any senses of morality and duty literally do not compute to him.
This is also what destroys his possible relationship with Ryan. Homelander sincerely loves him, if in a very twisted way, and honestly believes that raising Ryan to be like himself is good and can't fathom why Ryan wouldn't want that. He learns from this in Season 3, finally winning Ryan over to his side by being an actually decent parent. Season 4, however, shows him slipping back into his default mindset once he thinks he has Ryan under his thumb, failing to understand why Ryan feels guilty over accidentally killing someone and why Ryan is still worried about Butcher dying and would secretly visit him over it.
When A-Train betrays The Seven and becomes The Mole for The Boys, Homelander is brought to tears by his betrayal, as he genuinely doesn't understand why A-Train would do that even though he constantly threatened, bullied and verbally abused A-Train.
In Season 5, Homelander states that he can't understand why Butcher and Starlight would risk their lives to save someone like Hughie despite knowing very well that it's a trap, with Hughie stating that it's because he would do the same for them. Homelander, however, simply gives a look of disbelief at this response.
Evil Has a Bad Sense of Humor: Fitting for the manchild that he is, his sense of humor is very juvenile, and is a mixture of crude jokes and mocking people for their suffering.
Evil Hero: Homelander is a hero to the public and a sadistic psychopath privately with an additional flavor of craving for attention from the public.
Evil Is Hammy: He tends to play up his megalomaniacal tendencies for the camera or large crowds while posturing himself as a populist tyrant in the making. However, most of the time, he's more reserved, if unhinged.
Evil Is Petty: Goes in hand with his Psychopathic Manchild nature. When he finds out Maeve is both bisexual and never really loved him, he relentlessly mocks her sexuality and outs her without her consent on live television as a form of revenge. This is also one of his greatest faults. He has no greater goal in life other than to get people to keep loving him. This makes him both short-sighted because he lacks any sort of long-term planning skills, and very easy to manipulate by controlling the flow of the narcissistic supply he receives.
Evil Laugh: He goes on a maniacal laughing fit when he forces one of his childhood caretakers, Martin, to masturbate in front of him as his way of getting back at him for being mistreated in his youth. He's clearly having the time of his life in humiliating Martin.
Evil Learns of Outside Context: When Homelander learns about Soldier Boy's return, he has a meltdown in front of Ashley and The Deep fueled of his fear of being possibly being killed by him and steal his spotlight.
Evil Overlord: He achieves this status by the end of Season 4 with Sage's help. The old government is overthrown, Steven Calhoun is installed as a Puppet King, Homelander assumes the de facto control of the United States from the shadows, and the installation of martial law effectively creating an army of supes for him to command. Homelander also sees himself as the top God for a good reason, being the most powerful Supe in the setting. He even got an evil fortress in the form of the Vought Tower.
Evil Parents Want Good Kids: Downplayed, but Homelander is genuinely impressed that Ryan wants to carry on his late mother's legacy of being a protector. He even promises to help Ryan with that goal, and starts by forcing a sexist Vought producer to apologize to his female colleague when Ryan objects to the treatment he's witnessing from him. It quickly goes way too far when Homelander convinces Ryan to let the woman physically retaliate against the producer, but the good intention from Homelander on Ryan's behalf is there at least.
Evil Virtues: Pride, otherwise his fatal flaw, is the only shaky obstacle between Vought and turning Homelander into a servile and ultimately disposable superpowered slave. Although initially brittle and consistently volatile, it gives him the strength to weather being frequently outmaneuvered by the Boys and belittled by his employers for the first two seasons until he manages to make some serious moves on his own from the third season onward.
Expository Hairstyle Change: For most of Season One, Homelander wore a side part hairstyle that made him to come off as laid-back and human. Post Season One he changed to a formal slicked back hairstyle, which coincides with him trying to detach himself from humanity and his increasing god complex.
Eye Beams: Homelander can fire red beams from his eyes. They project concussive force, enough to push full-grown men back several feet if they're durable enough to withstand the beams, and are hot enough to usually rip through anything in their path like a blade or melt metal if he focuses, though not hot enough to instantly cauterize any injuries they cause (as basically every victim of them can attest to with their spilled blood and guts). He demonstrates fine control on several occasions (such as targeting a robber's machine gun and melting it, or burning someone's eyes out without obliterating their entire head), but his most common use of them in combat is an indiscriminate blast or sweep, causing collateral damage that could easily be avoided if he weren't so arrogantly careless.
Face–Heel Turn: It's revealed through flashbacks, as well as the episode of Diabolical about him that Homelander genuinely wanted to be a hero, but was broken by a lifetime of horrible experiments, and had his worldview completely shattered when after his first mission goes horribly awry, only for Vought to clean up his mess, leading him to the realization that he, in addition to being the most powerful being in the world, had complete freedom to do exactly whatever he wanted, no matter how horrible, with zero consequences.
Face, Nod, Action: After Soldier Boy attacks Ryan, both Homelander and Butcher momentarily join forces to laser him. They pause and exchange a nod of approval, seemingly united in purpose. However, this trope is subverted as Butcher continues to fight Soldier Boy, while Homelander turns his attention to ensuring his son's safety instead of teaming up with Butcher as the nod had implied.
Face of an Angel, Mind of a Demon: Out of all of the Seven, Homelander's image is easily the cleanest. He has no bad habits that have made it out to the public, is well-liked for his approachable, patriotic attitude, and is conventionally handsome. Behind closed doors, however, he quickly reveals himself to be the worst among them, being a complete sociopath with a twisted fixation on Stillwell, an encouraged God Complex, a completely fabricated "farm-boy" backstory and a massively high body count with zero remorse for any of it.
Fake Muscles: Homelander's costume gives him the appearance of a broad-shouldered Heroic Build you'd expect from a Superman expy. He's actually quite thin when seen without the extra padding. It makes sense when you consider that all his strength comes from his powers and it's unlikely he's ever actually exercised a day in his life.
Fake Ultimate Hero: Despite being promoted as the world's greatest hero by Vought, he's a selfish and unstable Psychopathic Manchild.
Fallen Hero: The Boys: Diabolical shows that once upon a time, he genuinely desired to be an actual hero like Superman. But after the catastrophe that his initial attempt went, alongside Black Noir and Stillwell's interference... not anymore.
Fantastic Racism: While he is casually racist in the traditional sense as well, he's more of a Supe vs. Non-Supe variety racist than anything else. He outright tells his son Ryan in Season 2 that they're Gods standing above the rest of humanity and he's generally dismissive of anybody without powers behind closed doors.
Farm Boy: Parodied. To convincingly sell the idea of Supes in the military to the American people, Vought manufactured a fake past about Homelander being a humble all-American farm boy in his childhood. Homelander is brought to a house he had never seen before where he had to make up a story about his inexistent grandparents and parents, and the childhood he never had for a reality show about the Seven.
Fascist, but Inefficient: Homelander wants to put Supes on top and in total control over the world and destroy all possible opposition. But multiple instances show that for all his threats he is completely out of his depths on how to actually manage it all.
Homelander was able to achieve his goal of getting Supes into the military, and he and Stormfront rallied the American people against a common enemy. However, Homelander is not a diplomat, he's simply a narcissistic, psychopathic manchild whose ego outstripped his charisma. When people stop praising him, he begins to lose his psychological grip, which throws his supporters deeper into disillusionment. He also spends so much time playing to Stormfront's base (i.e., paranoid racists), that it narrows his base considerably, and he has to distance himself from her when her Nazi origins come out, alienating anyone racist enough to still be willing to support her while he faces an uphill battle to re-endear himself to his less hateful former supporters.
This comes to a head in Season 4 when he is trying to rally support for taking over the US Government via a coup against Presidential elect Robert Singer. Sure, Homelander is able to have the masses who focus on their own agendas that align with his on his side, but several business owners and Federalist Society members tell him to cut the crap with his speeches about "Saving America" and demand answers on how he'll handle all the details about his supposed takeover. Namely who will be replacing government officials, how to handle negative mass public reactions, what will happen with the United States' international business relations, and other concerns. Homelander completely breaks down and tries to rely on Sage to step in, but she is lobotomized at the time and offers nothing.
Fatal Flaw: Pride.
Homelander was groomed from birth to be the "All-American Hero" when, in reality, he's an apex predator with a cocktail of psychological issues from his upbringing in a lab. He treats everyone as the omega to his alpha, kills criminals without arresting them and hurts anyone without hesitation.
The very existence of Billy Butcher is what intrigues him: it's firmly established that, for the first time ever, someone he's been "protecting" has decided to fight back, an obvious possibility due to the way he treats others behind closed doors. As such, he decides to do absolutely nothing about it and opts to just "play" with Butcher so he can break him emotionally before killing him. After Season 2, Homelander start dropping all pretenses of amicability since Maeve and The Boys have shattered his sense of superiority and have permanently destroyed his idea of a family (Stormfront is dead, Rebecca Butcher is dead, and Ryan wants nothing more to do with him and has gone into hiding).
Judging by the use of his powers, he mostly relies on his laser eyes and strength more than any actual combat technique, as he uses his powers quickly and haphazardly without considering collateral damage. Homelander cares so little for other people that he uses his powers without hesitation and without regard for public safety because he believes that, as the apex predator, nobody can or will stop him.
Homelander wants to be idolized by ordinary humans and supes as a literal god to validate his sense of superiority. As such, he developed an obsession with his public image. This was exploited by Stan Edgar and Queen Maeve, as while Homelander could easily kill them, doing so would destroy his image as an infallible and benevolent god.
Faux Affably Evil: He might seem like a hero at first, but the true Homelander is a manipulative, condescending, and mercurial psychopath who is also frequently sadistic and cruel. That said, he does a pretty good job of appearing as the exact opposite when in public as his superhero persona, always making a show of being guileless and idealistic and saying exactly what his audience wants to hear, which itself just points back to his disturbing capacity to use and manipulate others and his complete lack of concern for anyone other than himself.
Feeling Their Age: Homelander wants to recruit Sister Sage into the Seven, and demands proof of her supposed genius. In a surprising display of deduction, Sage dismantles his confidence by simply observing him. She points out his increasingly frequent hair dye jobs based on his pubic appearances, hinting at grays creeping in. She even throws a subtle jab at potential enlarged prostate issues based on his handwashing habits. Judging by his reaction, Sister Sage is right about all those things.
Sage: You got a lot of power, but you do age.
Fetish:
Based on his interactions with Stillwell, he appears to have one for breast-feeding and mommy play. Season 2 downright has him excitedly drinking a leftover bottle of her breast milk and having Doppelganger impersonate Stillwell while giving him glasses of milk. Though by mid-season, he may have gotten over his fetish for Stillwell at least, if him killing Doppelganger and obsessing over Stormfront is anything to go by. Season 4 brings his fetish back with Firecracker taking drugs to make herself lactate specifically for the purpose of satisfying it for him.
Aside from that, it's clear that like Stormfront, he's a sexual sadist. This is best shown with his rape of Becca, and Stormfront and him torturing a petty crook to death as foreplay.
The Fighting Narcissist: Homelander's immense ego cannot tolerate anyone being better than him. While not the most skilled fighter, he is the most powerful man in the world, and being outshined in any way is unthinkable for his fragile sense of superiority. As a narcissist, he maintains a carefully curated image of charm and perfection, embodying the "All-American Boy" ideal, and is widely regarded as the world's most handsome supe. He is particularly sensitive about his physical appearance, as seen after his fight with Soldier Boy, Butcher, and Hughie, where he returns with a visible bruise. Homelander covers it with makeup, clearly furious that someone marred his perfect image. Even a single hit to his face feels like a personal affront to his delusions of invincibility.
Flying Brick: A default feature for someone who is meant to be a villainous allegory for Superman.
Flying Firepower: Again, just like Superman. He can fly at supersonic speed and has a good target while flying.
Foe Romantic Subtext: With Butcher. The two become increasingly obsessed with outsmarting each other over the course of the series, and Homelander comes to respect Butcher's Nerves of Steel. Homelander even says, "I'll miss us" and laments how they'll never get to have their "last dance" upon learning of Butcher's impending death.
Foil:
To William Butcher. Both violent, emotionally damaged men raised by abusive father figures, both have racist views against their opposing species, and of course, they are mortal enemies. The difference is that Butcher learns to keep his flaws in check, becoming more tolerant of Supes such as Kimiko and Starlight, and genuinely cares for his teammates. Meanwhile, Homelander indulges in his most toxic traits with no intention of changing unless it personally benefits him. He has no compassion for his teammates or anyone who doesn't stroke his ego, and he condescendingly views humans as inferior beings because they do not have powers. Tellingly, by the midpoint of Season 3, all of Homelander's allies have abandoned him, while Hughie refuses to leave Butcher even when the latter asks him to, precisely because Butcher tried to rein himself in for Hughie's sake. Homelander also ended up adopting the toxic and violent behavior of his father Soldier Boy, just like Billy did with his Dad.
To his son, Ryan, being raised in a way that's cut off from the outside world — although Ryan is a bit different in that he has a healthy relationship with his mother. It's likely that in spite of being a sociopath, he has genuine empathy for his son for living through what he perceives as similar conditions to his own troubled upbringing.
To Hughie Campbell. Hughie is not physically tough, but is kind and compassionate at heart and hard-working. Homelander is literally the strongest man on the planet but is lazy, selfish, egotistical, and cruel. Interestingly, both have zero combat experience, but one compensates with his intelligence during battle and the other mostly uses brute force. Both are also treated and referred to as children despite being adults, but while Hughie is an innocent example of someone who has yet to fully mature and find himself, Homelander is a disturbing example of what happens when a spoiled brat is given ultimate power to bully whoever he wants. Both also yearn for a mother who was absent during their childhood.
Foregone Conclusion: As things spiral out of control for Homelander throughout the seasons, and in no small part of his psychological instability, full-blown ego, short-sighted goals, sadism, inability to reflect, and lack of knowledge regarding government, economics, deeper political, and international management, his going on a rampage across the entire U.S. and eventually the world to declare himself God-Emperor is not a matter of if, but when he'll snap. It's often a plot point for the Boys to find something to kill Homelander, or at least severely weaken him for the kill, before such a conclusion happens.
Forgot About His Powers: Homelander forgets about his Super-Hearing at opportune times for some characters. He somehow doesn't hear Hughie mention to Starlight that he messaged her despite being shown hearing Maeve talking to Helena on the phone for example.
Forgotten State of Undress: After his impulsive speech at his birthday, Homelander is shown sitting naked in his room reflecting on his emotional outburst. When Ashley enters and tells him that the speech actually made him more popular, she is visibly startled by his state of undress and getting hard at hearing people are accepting him for who he is. Homelander, meanwhile, is unfazed and only reacts once he realizes the awkwardness, bluntly telling her to continue because his body’s reaction isn’t about her.
For the Evulz: Him raping Becca Butcher. As horrible as he is, rape isn't really something Homelander indulges in, meaning there's really no discernible reason for him to have done it other than he could.
It can be hypothesised, however, that he specifically targeted and raped Becca due to Butcher's tongue-in-cheek jokes at Homelander's expense. It is certainly in character for him to be this petty.
Freudian Excuse: Despite the official story being that he was raised in rural America with a loving family similar to Clark Kent, Homelander actually turns out to have been raised without affection in a lab, explaining his psychological issues. His visit to Vogelbaum ends with him nearly in tears, revealing just how deep in pain he still is from his terrible childhood. The Boys: Diabolical also reveals that his first and only attempt at legitimate heroism ended catastrophically, with the incident immediately covered up by Black Noir to absolve Homelander of all responsibility, instilling in him his entitled and careless personality. It gets even worse in season 4, where it's revealed that his Love Hungry nature that defines so much of his monstrous character was something Vought psychologists deliberately conditioned into him to make him more obedient. He was basically rigged to be a psychopath from the start.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: Even after learning about his past from Vogelbaum, the Boys don't show Homelander any sympathy, as he's still an unapologetic rapist, murderer, and Super Supremacist. Even Vogelbaum, who regrets how he treated Homelander, still thinks his former experiment is a monster.
The Friend Nobody Likes: If The Deep is disliked by everyone in The Seven, Homelander is despised and feared. Even Black Noir, whom Homelander ironically had genuine respect and appreciation for, had no qualms about hanging him out to dry when the threat of Soldier Boy looms over both of them. The closest thing he has to someone genuinely loving him for who he is was Stormfront and even then she commits suicide when she realizes that he will never conform to her Nazi ideals.
Friendless Background: Being raised in a lab his whole life may have something to do with Homelander's incapability to have healthy relationships.
Genius Bruiser:
What's scary about Homelander is that he not only is obscenely strong, but he's also very, very smart. He's aware of pop culture, is an eloquent speaker, knows politics and government infrastructure, and is a very shrewd planner and manipulator. While the titular group initially assumes he's just Dumb Muscle, he's actually quite able to keep up with them in their Xanatos Speed Chess by manipulating his public persona and various employees at Vought. The only ones able to put him in his place are those who have irrefutable blackmail, and even that doesn't work for long.
Ultimately Zig Zagged though thanks to his massive character flaws also causing him to pick up the Villain Ball quite often. Though Homelander can often be dangerously clever at times and catch people off guard, he's also not nearly as smart as he thinks he is and just as often ruins his own long-term outlook due to his own impulsiveness. This gets worse over time due to Sanity Slippage and also gets further highlighted from Season 4 onwards once he teams up with the actually intelligence-boosted supe Sage, who's highly efficient and well-thought out plans usually get turned on their head in some way or another by Homelander.
Give Me a Reason: In Season 3, he gives a bone-chilling speech to Starlight about what he will do if she publishes the video of him leaving the passengers of Flight 37 to die.
Homelander: Go ahead. Release it. Let's light this candle, huh? I mean, sure, I'll lose everything, but then, I'll have nothing to lose. First, I'll take out the nerve centers — the White House, the Pentagon — then any domestic defense capabilities, and then critical infrastructure — like cellular, internet, that kind of thing. And then, well, I think then I'll just wipe New York off the fucking map - for fun. I'll even throw in Des Moines and that little cousin-fucker hick town that Maeve's from — 'cause why not? See Starlight, I'd prefer to be loved. I would. But if you take that away from me... Well, being feared is a one okie doke by me. So, go ahead, partner. Do it!
Glowing Eyes of Doom: Has his heat vision, which makes his eyes glow red when he uses it or just charges it up, and he's not above invoking Red Eyes, Take Warning when he wants to intimidate someone.
A God Am I: In Season 2, Homelander outright says this of himself and his son. Season 3 has Homelander explicitly declare that there's no God up there in the sky, only him. But Season 5 has his God Complex hit its apex when a hallucination of an Angelic Madelyn Sitwell convinces him he deserves to be more loved and praised than even Jesus himself.
God-Emperor: Homelander sees himself as a rightful wrathful God and by the end of Season 4, he finally achieves his goal, taking over America. Many of his followers worship and revere Homelander as their gracious hero without questioning his faults.
Greater-Scope Villain: While he doesn’t have any direct involvement in Gen V until Season 1’s finale, his decision to leave everyone on Flight 37 for dead leads to Indira Shetty’s Start of Darkness since her husband and daughter were on that plane. This resulted in her experimenting on the Supes in her school in order to create a virus that would wipe out their kind, thus making Homelander indirectly responsible for the entire plot of the show.
Greed: He's violently possessive towards anything and anyone he declares his property, as is shown in his interactions with Queen Maeve, Madelyn, Ryan and lately, Starlight since he forced her to be his new girlfriend. In Season 3, he tells her, that from now on, she will be his dutiful girlfriend who will worship him.
Green-Eyed Monster:
Any attempts to get close to Queen Maeve are met with brutal slaughter at Homelander's hands, as one Hollywood producer learned the hard way. It's why Maeve doesn't want Elena involved.
He extends this obsessive behaviour toward Ryan too. He absolutely hates the fact Ryan loves Butcher and even suffers a complete meltdown after simply finding a photo of Butcher with Becca in the boy's schoolbag.
Ground-Shattering Landing: Sometimes Homelander lands with such an impact that it breaks the ground beneath him. He seemingly does it to impress or intimidate.
The Grunting Orgasm: Homelander snarls like an animal while having sex with Stormfront even before having an orgasm. Probably because is the first time he has had enjoyable sex with someone.
Guest Fighter: Appears as an Operator in Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II during a limited time event and Mortal Kombat 1 as part of Kombat Pack 1.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: Very much subverted. At the start of the series, he's widely regarded as perfect, with no flaws and no vices. But as time goes on it becomes more and more clear that he's anything but and is easily the most sadistic of The Seven.
Hair-Trigger Temper: He's prone to lashing out with a lot of cussing when things do not go his way and is generally cruel, cold, violent, sadistic, impatient, and intolerant.
Handicapped Badass: For a given matter of being handicapped, Homelander is severely emotionally imbalanced due to his cold and cruel upbringing with repressed mental trauma that can resurface in the form of a homicidal rage if he were to suffer enough mental and psychological duress. That being said, he handles it well for the most part so long as he continues to be showered with praise and respect and being a Superman Substitute.
Hates Defiance: Homelander is a mentally unstable narcissist of an egomaniac who does NOT process defiance or criticism well. His punishments range for forcing Sister Sage into the public eye for disagreeing with him to outright murdering a protester at a rally for himself.
Hates Everyone Equally: At best, he treats people as an asset to his goals; at worst, he'll kill, cripple and maim anyone at the smallest provocation. In Homelander's eyes, he's the apex predator who can do whatever he wants, and nobody can stop him. He mocks and outs Queen Maeve's relationship and participates in homophobic movements, he believes Blindspot and A-Train are liabilities to The Seven because of their physical conditions and he severely wounds Blindspot just so he can prove his point about Blindspot's disability, he carelessly uses his powers without thinking of public safety, he does not care for religion because of his God Complex, he wants to raise Ryan so he wouldn't grow up to be a "little girl" by living only with his mother, and he would have killed Starlight for not following his orders without considering how it may affect Vought's reputation with the feminist movement. His prejudice is more towards humanity itself rather than any particular race or ethnicity, as he believes supes are inherently superior compared to non-superpowered humans.
Heartbroken Badass:
Homelander is genuinely distressed seeing his lover burned to death, and he barely keeps himself from crying.
He's given pause towards the idea that Black Noir would abandon him with the threat of Soldier Boy looming.
He actually sobs in disbelief at the knowledge that A-Train betrayed him
Heartwarming Orphan: Even Homelander was once a sweet, adorable toddler who just wanted to play with his blanket.
The Heavy: Vought in the first two seasons is the true overriding threat The Boys are aiming to take down, but Homelander is the most physically imposing and deadly enemy. Practically every major conflict can be traced back to him, from Butcher's crusade against Supes, to the Flight 37 crash, to the Supe terrorists, to Butcher's alliance with Soldier Boy. He ultimately upstages his remaining superiors in the company, fully coming into his own as the Big Bad.
Hero Killer: He killed Blindspot and Supersonic, who are both, unlike him, genuine heroes and good people.
Hero with an F in Good: This doesn't apply to the megalomaniac he currently is, but, as revealed in The Boys: Diabolical, he started his superhero career genuinely wanting to help people. Unfortunately, because of his isolated upbringing, he was stuck with a very bad case of Does Not Know His Own Strength that completely derailed his first mission and caused the very people he was trying to save to turn on him. After Black Noir absolved him of all responsibility, he just gave up on being a legitimate superhero.
Hidden Depths:
He's quite good at detective work, and it's he who figures out the Boys' plot against him and their personal motives.
Homelander also has a romantic side, which is shown when he brought flowers for Stormfront. He also is shown feeling regret for killing Stillwell.
Despite having a god complex and being a malignant narcissist, he seems to enjoy being dominated sexually (which likely is tied to his Oedipus Complex).
Believe it or not, there was a time when Homelander genuinely wanted to be the kind of hero he only pretends to be, but a combination of his bad upbringing, his first mission being a disaster, and escaping responsibility for his mistakes set him down the path that led him to be the monster he is now.
He genuinely loves his son Ryan and wants to give him the childhood he never had. He even puts himself in potential harms' way to check on him after Soldier Boy knocks Ryan unconscious.
He shows genuine respect for Soldier Boy, calling him the "hero of heroes." Just before the Herogasm fight, Homelander even tells Soldier Boy that he was his "hero" growing up and that he watched all of his films hundreds of times over. When Soldier Boy reveals to him that they are father and son, Homelander emotionally opens up to him and expresses his desire for them to have a loving relationship. This doesn't go well.
Even after killing Black Noir, he still expresses the respect he had for him, claiming Noir was worth more than Ashley, the Deep, and A-Train "put together". He also is clearly distressed and feels betrayed when Noir reveals he always knew Soldier Boy was Homelander's father.
According to the Season 4 premiere, he's apparently a fan of Smash Mouth. His Reddit AMA has him mention he also likes Creed and Nickelback.
Although he's normally a very Eagleland brand of culturally ignorant, he actually has a surprising amount of historical knowledge. He knows that Jesus wasn't actually born in December 25th, and has a lot of interest in how the Caesars managed to subvert democracy. He also brags of having read Frederick Vought's (admittedly forged) biography multiple times, implying he's genuinely interested in the history of the company.
Hiding Behind Religion: Homelander is an ordained minister and makes a big deal of saying he's doing God's work. It's pretty clear that he just finds this a useful belief to invoke, however.
Hijacked by Ganon: Despite Gen V initially seeming to be largely separate from The Boys, it's eventually revealed that the Big Bad, Indira Shetty, is motivated to wipe out all Supes thanks to Homelander killing her family during the Flight 37 disaster. As if that weren't enough, Homelander himself shows up in the final episode and uses the chaos at Godolkin University to recruit Cate and Sam to his Super Supremacist cause and kickstart his upcoming Evil Plan, thus completely hijacking the plot and ending the season victorious.
His Own Worst Enemy: Homelander would be a far more effective threat if not for his lack of impulse control and inability to handle criticism. Hell, he's not even nice to himself when talking to his own reflection. Sage lampshades this when telling him off after he fires her for keeping secrets, noting that he'll always be the one person that he can't simply fire or kill to get his way.
Hollywood Atheist: In "The Only Man in the Sky" Homelander reveals he doesn't actually believe in God (although a part of his public image is supposedly being a devout Christian and minister) while "talking down" a suicidal young woman, saying it's only him up there in the sky. This is right before he makes her jump, instead of saving her and of course he'd long been established as a murderous, hypocritical asshole.
Hollywood Mid-Life Crisis: This being Homelander, this is quite a dark example. Sister Sage suspects he suffers from mid life crisis because he is getting old. And she is right, Homelander does feel empty despite finally achieving most of his goals, and starts to wonder what kind of legacy he wants to leave behind for his son. Sage tells him that crushing the masses won't make him happy either, and proposes a twisted solution – inciting chaos and then swooping in as a savior, further solidifying his power and adoration. "Like Caesar." When he hears people talking about how only covering the wrinkles costed the production around 9 mil. dollars, he shows jealousy toward Ryan's youth and budding popularity.
Horrifying the Horror: He manages to put the fear of God into Madelyn Stillwell, a sociopathic and machiavellian businesswoman. However, Soldier Boy is this to him. The fact that Soldier Boy can permanently render a Supe powerless and is one of the two people on the planet that can beat him in a one-on-one fight (other than Maeve) is a MASSIVE threat to his ego.
Hourglass Plot: In the preceding season, Homelander's association with Stormfront resulted in a significant decline in his popularity. Conversely, Starlight's popularity flourished, positioning her as Vought's new public face. However, in season 4, Homelander has demonstrably recovered from the previous season's public relations nightmare and cultivated a loyal and dedicated fanbase. Starlight, on the other hand, has become the target of a relentless aggressive campaign orchestrated by Firecracker. This campaign, coupled with Starlight's own public outburst, has resulted in a devastating blow to her reputation.
Humanizing Tears: Even someone as irredeemable as Homelander has moments of vulnerability.
He cries when Stormfront is deadly wounded by Ryan.
Cries again when he talks to himself in the mirror.
In the final of Season 4 he is a complete mess thinking everything he has built got destroyed.
Hypocrite: What good narcissist would he be if he didn't have double standards?
He's jealously possessive of Maeve and refuses to let her get close to anyone else. This doesn't stop him from trying to put the moves on Stillwell at the same time, and later Becca after he murders Stillwell.
He rejects Blindspot as a potential candidate for the Seven because he's a "cripple" while making an understandable reason for him being a potential liability if his hearing were to be compromised (though he didn't have to rupture the kid's eardrums to make a point, which would've either kill him or leave him in a Fate Worse than Death). However, this is hypocritical in two damning facts:
His Best Friend and teammate, Black Noir, is regarded as The Reliable One despite being physically mute, disfigured, possibly still half-blind, and brain damaged underneath his mask. Though, it's downplayed given that Noir is still deadly efficient, and super strong, fast, and durable.
Homelander himself has deeply ingrained and repressed mental trauma from his "upbringing" that left him severely emotionally imbalanced, with a possible Split Personality as revealed in Season 3. Furthermore, the Prime series and The Boys: Diabolical show that sufficient mental duress can bring him into a dissociative homicidal rage. All of these, are something that's clearly not something you want to have, especially when left unchecked, in high-stress situations that involve people's lives at stake. And furthermore, his already fucked-up sanity is slowly eroding throughout the show as he continues to suffer setback after setback, until it's only a matter of time of when he'll be Jumping Off the Slippery Slope.
He rejects Stormfront's desire for an Aryan master race of supers because he sees himself as a master race. Then he turns right around and kidnaps Maeve with the intention of stealing her eggs for him to fertilize and create superbabies with.
In Season 3 he castigates A-Train for killing Blue Hawk a fellow Supe, in cold blood. Not only has Homelander had Popclaw killed on his orders (with A-Train carrying out the hit, no less) but he has also killed twice the number of Supes as A-Train (the African Supervillain, Supersonic, Termite and Black Noir). It's also likely Blindspot died from the injuries Homelander inflicted upon him. He also regularly threatens other Supes with death if they displease him or simply throw his weight around. A-Train notices the hypocrisy but decides not to say anything.
In Gen V he follows this up by calling Marie an animal who likes harming her fellow Supes, then gleefully lasers her with a smile seconds later.
He also harshly criticizes the Deep for his bestiality despite the fact that he once milked a cow in a very…suggestive manner.
The Season 4 premiere has Homelander losing patience with the sycophancy of his subordinates. This is despite him frequently retaliating — usually with lethal results — against anyone who displeases him, even going as far as threatening a female board member simply for asking him what his plans for Vought were. He hires Sister Sage because she is the only one at Vought who will be direct and honest with him but he still ignores her advice half of the time and punishes her when she says something he doesn't like.
He seethes whenever he has to cede or even just share the limelight with Ryan, even though it's clear that the boy is only going along with the Celebrity Superhero process because of his father's encouragment.
His Love Hungry and Love Is a Weakness traits run contradictory to each other throughout the show. As much as Homelander knows his desire for love is unhealthy and keeping him chained to Vought like a dog despite his immense power, and as much as he tries to cut himself off, he'll always crave for it no matter what and always desire for more regardless of anyone's well-being. This is in no small part of Barbara revealing to Homelander that Vought programmed his behavior to seek love as a child to better control him.
I Am the Noun: "I am the Homelander!" is a rare line the Homelander uses to intimidate people, among them Starlight and Anika.
I Control My Minions Through…: Homelander uses a combination of authority, fear, sadism, blind obedience and coercion to get people to do his dirty work for him. Fear and coercion in particular happen to be the primary means by which he entraps and corrupts people, and then he uses the threat of retaliation against their loved ones to keep them in line. This comes to bite him time and again as same people despise him and actively work to bring his downfall.
Icy Blue Eyes: It reflects his cruel personality.
Ignore the Fanservice: He ignores Firecracker completely when she repeatedly tells him that she's willing to do anything for him, strongly hinting she's willing to service him sexually. Subverted when she reveals she's made herself lactate for him.
I Just Want to Be Loved:
He is completely and utterly dependent on the adulation of the masses. He obsessively follows how well he polls, like he is trying to actually use it to quantify how much he is loved. While Stormfront is happily talking about how soon they won't have to deal with premieres, screaming fans etc., his expression becomes more introverted as he seems to realize he doesn't want to lose any of it. Maeve is able to rein him in before he can kill Butcher by threatening to show everyone that he let a plane crash out of apathy. Long-term this would have given Homelander the freedom he wants to be the tyrannical bastard he wishes he could be, but Maeve points out that nobody would love him, at which point Homelander spaces out.
By Season 3, he's taken a page or two from Machiavelli and learned to compromise on his need for love. While he'd rather be loved and worshipped as the public's Superman, if the push comes to shove then he will settle for fear and rule as their Darkseid. He even tells himself during his Mirror Monologue that his dependence on love is a sign of his humanity and therefore a weakness that he needs to "cut out" so he can truly be a god.
It’s revealed in Season 4 that the scientists who raised him quite literally programmed this trait into his brain as a means of keeping him from escaping and going completely rogue, which, as Barbara explains, he could have done at any point in time with his powers were it not for him being terrified of losing everyone’s approval.
Immortality Seeker: In perhaps one of the show's biggest uses of Irony, Homelander has not inherited his father's immortality despite being the strongest Supe, which is a blow to his ego and a source of paranoia since he realizes he can die just like the humans he despises. By season 4, his hairs (both upstairs and downstairs) have started going gray, and he actually appears to be ageing past Soldier Boy physically. He recruits Sister Sage in part out of the hope she can devise some kind of longevity treatment for him. In the final season, he seeks V-One, the first iteration of Compound V, to make himself immortal.
Immune to Bullets: A default power for someone who is meant to be a villainous parody of Superman.
Impaled with Extreme Prejudice: During a bank robbery, Homelander, instead of simply apprehending the robber, chooses to thrust his fist into his torso, gruesomely gutting him and sadistically reassuring him as the robber bleeds to death.
Implied Death Threat: He loves giving these under the disguise of empty platitudes.
Incest Subtext: He seems to possess an odd psychological lust towards his somewhat mother-figure Stillwell, something that she notices and exploits. He watches her pump breast milk using his x-ray vision and becomes irritable whenever her infant son is around, with breast-feeding and mommy-play as a Fetish. This doesn't keep him from killing her, though.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: Homelander has an absolutely massive yet also incredibly fragile ego and it's heavily implied his need for admiration is a way of making up for the love he never got as a kid. Sister Sage is reluctant at first to join the Seven exactly because she believes that his ego won't let him tolerate a black woman who is 8000 times smarter than him. And he shows signs of being jealous of his own son once people start to give Ryan attention.
Insistent Terminology: Not Super Terrorists, Super Villains. It tends to make them more marketable.
Insufferable Genius: Downplayed; Homelander is far from being a genius, but he can actually be very cunning and he knows how to read people very well, something that he's very much aware of. When Starlight attempts to blackmail him over the Flight 37 video, he proceeds to shut down her plan by explaining exactly how he’d go about wiping out humanity. And it’s clear that he’s thought it through down to the most precise detail. He even manages to outsmart Stan Edgar in Season 3, who's the ultimate chessmaster of the show. Despite all this though, he's been outplotted several times throughout the show by various characters. He's also not as intelligent as he thinks he is. This is best shown when he takes over Vought, and then realizes that he has no idea how to actually run a business, let alone a massive corporation. He doesn't even know what EBITDA margins are.
Homelander: I'm stronger, I'm smarter…I'm better! I AM BETTER!
Intimidation Demonstration: Homelander often uses his glowing red eyes as a way to intimidate others, it worked quite well with Stormfront.
Invincible Villain: Played straight in Season 1, when nothing the Boys could possibly do would damage him, not even threatening his supposed Morality Chain Madelyn Stillwell, who herself was unable to keep him in check and scared to death of his whims. But come Season 2, he's casually dismissed by Stan Edgar, has his leadership questioned by Stormfront, is trapped by Kenji (albeit temporarily) under a pile of rubble, and finally blackmailed into submission by Queen Maeve. In the end he's back at being Vought's puppet and reduced to masturbating in the top of the tower claiming he can do "whatever the fuck he wants". He really can't. Then comes Season 3, where after losing Ryan, his lover Stormfront's suicide, and the stress from his ongoing Humiliation Conga, without anything to truly anchor his already fragile ego to reality... he made his return. Even the plane video can do nothing at this point. However, it's also been decisively established that he's not as invincible as everyone (including himself) thought, as he can indeed be hurt by exceptionally strong supes such as Queen Maeve and Soldier Boy, as well as the highly empowered Billy Butcher under the effects of Temp-V.
Ironic Echo: Before he kills Stillwell, he claims that as Homelander, he can do "whatever the fuck he want[s]" with an unhinged, terrifying certainty. At the end of Season 2, a string of failures and losses have led to him jerking off in public above a city while repeatedly saying he can do whatever he wants, only this time it's utterly pathetic.
It's All About Me:
Homelander cares more about his popularity and reputation than he does about actually trying to help people and benefiting for the greater cause.
Maeve: You've managed to make this about yourself in less than 20 seconds flat.
His relationship with his son boils down to this. Despite genuinely loving him, he clearly sees Ryan as an extension of himself and more as a piece of property than an individual. Case in point, in Season 4 when Vought starts marketing Ryan, Homelander insists the only reason Ryan is special is because he gave birth to him. He inserts himself in all his heroic stunts so the boy cannot take his spotlight, and when Ryan becomes distraught at taking an innocent life, Homelander expects him to view himself as a God above human "toys" and is furious Ryan is not grateful that his father his giving everything Homelander himself wanted as a kid. Homelander doesn't give a damn about the boy's needs if they don't align with what Homelander wants.
When he learns that the bedridden Stormfront has committed suicide by biting off her own tongue and bleeding out, Homelander is devastated, but less because a human being has died, and more because she did it on his birthday; if anything, he seems more insulted than anguished.
Jerkass: Exaggerated; it's quite astounding how much of a dick this man is capable of being. What makes Homelander stand out in terms of evilness is how he takes great pleasure in committing awful acts and often rubs it in the face of those around him. He's even mean to himself when he's talking to himself in the mirror.
Jerkass at Your Discretion: It's something of a Running Gag how he gives praise to regular people only to badmouth them as soon as they can't hear him.
Jerkass Has a Point:
In Season 2, Homelander unceremoniously kicks A-Train off the team for being too slow. While cruel, Homelander is quite right that, between his dependence on Compound V and damaged heart, A-Train is neither the fastest man in the world, nor fit to be a superhero.
While he definitely didn't need to destroy the kid's eardrums to prove his point, Homelander is not wrong when pointing out that despite Blindspot's super-hearing compensating for his blindness, if you take away his hearing, Blindspot is pretty much reduced to any other blind cripple.
While his idea of parenting isn't exactly better, he's not wrong that the way Vought and Becca are raising Ryan is highly damaging. He recognises that the way the kid is being raised the same as how he himself was raised, and merely adding a mother figure and a fake neighbourhood does little to mitigate the lack of social development or real world experience. While Ryan's situation is still far better than how he was raised (and Becca is trying her best to keep Ryan from turning out anything like him), they were setting themselves up for a repeated experience when the time came to introduce Ryan to the outside world.
In Season 3, while he's obviously venting his misplaced anger at A-Train, he's not exactly wrong when calling out on A-Train's original eating habits since he's not running as much as he used to and is gaining a noticeable gut.
His entire televised rant in Season 3 is quite understandable given how much he's been Conditioned to Be Weak by Vought to be nothing more than a puppet for them despite his god-like power.
Karma Houdini Warranty:
After spending much of Season 1 and 2 getting away with mass murder, Compound V distribution, and making life a living hell for the Boys and fellow supes, Homelander gets hits hard with karma in the finale. Queen Maeve, whom he outed as a lesbian against her will, blackmails Homelander with footage of his involvement in the Flight 37 disaster. Unwilling to lose the public's love for him, Homelander is forced to give into her demands that he stop harassing his female colleagues, give up custody of his son Ryan to Billy Butcher and reinstate Starlight into The Seven. Ultimately, Homelander is forced to abandon his tyrannical ambitions and is reduced to a mere pawn at mercy of Vought.
Not anymore in Season 3, he straight up tells Starlight that she's got nothing on him. If he ever loses the love of the people because of the Flight 37 incident, he will have nothing left to lose, and will go on a murder rampage. By the end of Season 3, he succeeds in what he was trying to do in Season 2: Get Ryan completely on his side.
Karmic Injury: In "The Big Ride", Homelander ruptures the ear drums of a blind superhero who auditions for a spot on The Seven. In the Season 3 finale, Maeve stabs him in the ear.
Kick the Dog: Frequently and habitually, to the point that anyone interacting with him immediately becomes sympathetic, even unlikable and previously unsympathetic fellow dog-kickers like Stillwell, Ashley, A-Train, and the Deep.
Nothing in the show illustrates this trope more than being partly responsible for the Flight 37 crash and him not bothering to save anybody in order to preserve his image and kickstart his war idea later on.
His past rape of Becca also counts, as he's notably otherwise never shown doing anything like that. Why he decided to rape a woman that day is still unknown (assuming that it wasn't to get back at her husband for insulting him).
When Ashley presents Blindspot as a new addition to the Seven, Homelander acts accommodating to the impressionable Supe at first, then promptly bursts his eardrums to show how useless his power is and says that he doesn't want a "cripple" on the team. Then, to make it worse, he berates Ashley, walks right over Blindspot while he's writhing in a pool of his own blood to get close to her face and states that he decides who joins The Seven, not her.
Throughout Season 3, Homelander goes out of his way to bully and fat-shame A-Train for absolutely no reason, even pretending to favor the Deep just to spite him.
He forces a depressed woman to jump off a building in Season 3 because he was in a bad mood at the time over Stormfront's suicide.
Manages to do this to the Deep of all people by forcing him to eat his pet octopus Timothy alive (keep in mind he knows that the Deep can hear Timothy begging him not to do this).
Kick the Morality Pet: Does this to his son, Ryan, throughout Season 4, illustrating how Homelander's narcissistic traits and unwillingness to change make it impossible for him to be a good parent.
When he tries to comfort his son on getting more popular next time, rather than him accidentally killing someone in a stunt. When he sees his son was actually sad and guilty about killing Koy, he doesn't get why he's so broken up about it as to him, stunt people die a lot and aren't something to care about. What's worse is after, in a moment of pettiness, takes Ryan's milkshake that he brought to cheer him up, as likely punishment. Better than the above, but still petty.
He also does it again when he smells Butcher's scent on Ryan and even as his son is reassuring him he still sees him as his father, Homelander yells at him for being "ungrateful", tells him how he's giving him everything that he wanted as a child, and almost throws a ball at him which shatters glass that makes Ryan run away. However, after Ryan runs, he goes to the shattered glasses and tries to tell himself how can he be a better father to Ryan.
In their last confrontation when Homelander finds a picture of Butcher, Becca, and Terror, he becomes unreasonably angry, smashes and trashes the entire apartment, and demands Ryan come to him, to which his son defies him. While he doesn't physically hurt Ryan, it's clear that Homelander's pathological need to control his son have driven him to emotional abuse, irreparably shattering their relationship.
Knight of Cerebus: While Homelander is capable of being darkly humorous at times, he is by far the most evil member of The Seven. Anytime he's onscreen, there is a very good chance that something terrible is going to happen, especially if there's a moral, innocent or defenseless bystander around him and if he's sufficiently pissed off.
Knight Templar Parent: When a detractor of Homelander throws a water bottle at Ryan, he risks his entire reputation by lasering his detractors face. His followers, however, eat this up.
Kubrick Stare: Whenever Homelander gets angry or wants to intimidate someone, his Death Glare is always shot from a superior angle to amplify the madness of the character, while the eyes are always the focus of the camera.
Lack of Empathy: He cares for no one else besides himself. When Translucent goes missing, he doesn't care about the man's plight, but rather the indirect challenge to his own authority.
Large Ham: Practically his job to ham it up, but Homelander takes it to a whole new level and Anthony Starr steals pretty much every scene he's in.
The Last Dance: Discussed. When conversing with Butcher at the beginning of Season 3, Homelander fantasizes about a grand final battle between the two amongst the remains of a "scorched earth", an idea that Butcher is absolutely delighted by. Upon realizing that Butcher is dying at the beginning of the following season, Homelander expresses disappointment that they'll never get to have their "last dance".
Laughably Evil: Downplayed. While his crimes, mental instability, and sadism are all played dead seriously, his constant Jerkass behavior and petty childishness is sometimes Played for Laughs.
Laughing Mad:
Homelander breaks out into hauntingly deranged laughter at the end of Season 2, and dear God, it is TRULY terrifying!
He indulges in cackling fits while tormenting the scientists that tortured him as a child.
Lazy Bum: He prefers to take shortcuts and get things done quickly, without taking much thought. Despite being the most powerful super of world, Homelander uses his heat vision to take down his enemies with disastrous consequences: his laziness with his eye beam usage is what would end up causing the Flight 37 disaster to play out like it does, carelessly destroying the planes control panel while killing the terrorist, and when he accidentally killed a innocent civilian during the task in Africa.
The Leader: Homelander is the leader and mascot of "The Seven," Vought's premier Super Team.
Lean and Mean: Underneath his muscle-padded suit, he's incredibly slender as shown when Doppelgänger shapeshifts as him while wearing lingerie and when he's watching his angry speech on TV while naked. And mean? Look at 85% of the tropes in here.
Leave No Witnesses: He was initially sent to Flight 37 in an effort to stop terrorists from asserting control over the plane. When he destroys the controls with his Laser Beams (intentional or not), Homelander opts to abandon the plane and leave the passengers to die, much to Queen Maeve's distress and shock. The passengers rush forward to beg for his help, leading to Homelander firing up his laser eyes and threatening to "laser every fucking one" of them, before departing the plane with a dismayed Maeve. The primary reason for letting the passengers die was because they potentially would have been able to slander Homelander's reputation, though he also develops an idea from the incident to send superheroes to the military.
Legacy Seeker: In Season 4, he worries about what kind of legacy he wants to leave for his son. He confesses to Sage he wants to leave behind something pure, cleansed like marble, which are same words his alternative personality used to convince him to kill everything is human about Homelander.
Leitmotif: "Homelander in Hallway" and "I Can Do Anything".
A Lighter Shade of Black: Horrifyingly, he actually comes across as the more sympathetic party in comparison to Stormfront. While Homelander is a murderous Super Supremacist who treats all regular humans like dirt as soon as he's off-camera, he at least isn't as, shall we say, selective in his contempt as Stormfront, who is seriously guilty of both Fantastic Racism and regular racism. He gets into a romantic affair with her all the same, but does express discomfort when he actually sees her espousing her more private beliefs.
Lightning Bruiser: Being an expy of Superman, this is a given. He is the strongest hero Vought has to offer and can fly from one area to another within seconds.
Like Father, Like Son: He's a violent bully and Control Freak just like his biological father, Soldier Boy, to the point that it drove members of his team to conspire against him. Also, like Soldier Boy, he hears from a redhead ex-girlfriend that she never loved him and always hated his guts.
Like Father, Unlike Son: He actually considered Black Noir a good friend. Soldier Boy, on the other hand, hated Black Noir for trying to make something of himself and is even the reason why Black Noir is horribly scarred and mute in the first place. Unfortunately, the friendship fizzles out in Season 3 after Black Noir abandons him during his time of need. However, Homelander likes Noir so much that he forgave Noir when Noir returned, but Homelander tearfully ends up killing him in the season finale when Homelander learns that Noir had kept secret the truth of Homelander's parentage. And coinciding with a twisted version of Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting, Homelander also unconditionally loves his son Ryan despite being a terrible parent, and would never even think to kill him for showing defiance. This is in contrast to Soldier Boy, who tries to strangle Homelander to death for the simple act of crying about how badly he wants a family.
Likes Older Women:
His fixation on Stillwell is somewhat derived from her being an older woman with a maternal air and, as a lab rat baby, he has serious mommy issues that she exploits. Their first sexual scene is him staring through the wall at her pumping her breast milk. Their second has her unbuttoning her blouse and symbolically breastfeeding him with her finger with his head in her lap. Then they have sex and she compliments him on being her good boy and how she's proud of him.
He also starts a sexual relationship with Stormfront, and though he doesn't realize it at first, she's old enough to be his grandmother, and is the widow of Frederick Vought, but when he finds out, it definitely makes him more interested than he was already.
Limited Wardrobe: He's only seen outside his superhero costume twice. Other than that, he is always wearing it, no matter what.
Living Emotional Crutch: While Homelander is dependent on receiving love from everyone around him, he goes through life always searching for someone he can attach himself to and unconditionally feed him love. In Season 1, it's Stillwell, but after he murders her, he goes through a variety of potential replacements including his son, Becca, Doppelganger, Maeve, and the rest of the Seven before settling on Stormfront. Stormfront is well aware of his need for someone to depend on and exploits it to put him under her control by tarnishing his reputation and then forcing him to turn to her to restore it.
Living Lie Detector: It's deconstructed, since Homelander functions like a real life polygraph, meaning he doesn't actually detect the lies themselves but rather the signs of stress people feel when they lie, like increased heartbeat and adrenaline. This misleads him more often than not, like when he assumes Starlight is lying to him but really she's just scared shitless of him, and anyone can get away with lying to his face as long as they have Nerves of Steel as Frenchie, Stillwell, and Vogelbaum demonstrate.
Logical Weakness:
Homelander has super-hearing, so loud high-pitched noises will cause him pain, even if they're some distance away. The Boys use a pile of speakers against Homelander, but that was only effective as a distraction as Homelander was not particularly inconvenienced. It's a much more effective weapon against Ryan, either because his hearing is superior or he has less experience with his senses.
Due to being so much more powerful than basically everybody else in the world, he has no real idea how to handle himself in a fight where he actually needs to, well, fight. Any serious resistance throws him for a loop, and he finds it hard to adjust to unexpected changes in combat, like the new superpowers of Butcher and Hughie.
Despite his incredible power, Homelander does have one notable weakness: Unlike Soldier Boy, Stormfront and Black Noir, he still ages just like any human. This means that he is not immune to getting older and dying of old age and likely his powers weakening as time goes on. Part of why he recruits Sister Sage is that he hopes she will be able to find a way to make him immortal like those above.
Aside from his x-ray vision, Homelander's eyesight still functions in the same way as a normal human. So MM signing a bright stage light in his face is enough to dazzle Homelander, stunning him for a few seconds.
Lonely at the Top: In "Proper Preparation and Planning", he tells his son Ryan that he hates the fact that he's the only superior being, since it makes him feel "isolated and alone". Even then, he hates feeling that way because he sees it as a weakness.
Lousy Lovers Are Losers: Homelander might be a Physical God, but he still only lasts a whopping 45 seconds from insertion to ejaculation with Stillwell, much to his embarrassment.
Love Hungry: One of his biggest issues, being that he was raised in a lab with nobody to really "care" for him, he quickly latches on to people who give him affection, and even allows him to show his softer sides, such as when he got a bouquet of roses for Stormfront, or taking Ryan away from the crowds, when it was overwhelming him but, he latches on hard when they do, making him insecure or jealous when it seems that said object of affection is snubbing him, such as him burning down his trailer when Stormfront was genuinely held up at Sage Grove instead of being "20 minutes", something that wasn't her fault. It was engineered as a limiter by Vought so that Homelander couldn't escape by having him crave approval and love of everyone around him.
Love Is a Weakness: Despite his cravings for adoration and love, he secretly believes this is actively hindering him and he needs to learn to live without love in order to be "pure" and "clean".
Ludicrous Gibs: Homelander’s laser vision consistently produces over-the-top gory effects, reducing his victims to grotesque showers of blood, guts, and viscera.
Luke, I Am Your Father: He learns that he is Soldier Boy's biological son, having been engineered from his sperm sample.
Lust: Considering he works for Vought, Homelander would do anything to garner as much popularity and praise as possible. He's also got the more colloquial sexual version, with a strong desire for Madelyn Stillwell, Stormfront, and Becca Butcher, all of whom he eventually manages to have sex with (or rape, in the latter's case).
Lying to Protect Your Feelings:
He's on the receiving end regarding Becca's fate and the existence of their son. Homelander is pissed off by the condescension displayed towards him and kills Stillwell for it. It turns out it's not just to protect his feelings, but so Homelander won't corrupt his son into becoming just like him.
He often lies to himself about how messed up he really is and how much he desires to be loved, because then he would have to acknowledge he isn't a perfect god but a mere human who needs help like everyone else. No matter how much he tells himself that he's moved past his weakness, he will never, ever be truly rid of it.
Madness Mantra: His final scene in Season 2 shows him masturbating on a building while madly ranting: "I can do whatever I want."
Make an Example of Them: He kills Alex, just to put Annie in her place, and threatens her that if she doesn't comply, the next one will be Hughie.
The Man in the Mirror Talks Back: In 'Herogasm', Homelander's reflection talks to Homelander in the mirror, hinting at a Split Personality that he may have developed in his childhood or just simply how fractured his mind has become.
Manly Man: On the outside, Homelander seems to be and wishes to be this patriarchal masculine presence who believes crying is for the weak, has a powerful social status and is an imposing presence, but all those things are undermined by his manchild tendencies.
Man of Steel, Woman of Kleenex: This is implied to be part of his attraction to Stormfront, one of the very few people capable of withstanding his powers. He is cautious at first then they let loose on one another during their Destructo-Nookie scene, after which he is completely infatuated with her.
Mascot Villain: Homelander is arguably the most iconic character in The Boys, frequently featured on promotional material and merchandise due to his popularity. Being the series' primary antagonist, his image is widely recognized and even embraced in pop culture, extending to references in the music industry by various artists.
Mask of Sanity: He has a reputation a as clean, friendly, and religious hero in public, but beneath that is a murderous narcissist with temper problems and a cocktail of mental issues.
Master Actor: While Homelander's mask was slipping from time to time, he still maintained the façade of the perfect, all-American superhero for years. He convincingly plays the role of a benevolent savior, radiating charm, patriotism, and compassion to the public, all while hiding his sociopathic tendencies. He truly starts to have serious troubles maintaining that façade only when the Boys, Starlight and other people allied to them decide to get directly involved.
Masturbation Means Sexual Frustration: Part of his Villainous Breakdown. Unable to comprehend his son being taken away from him and being further restricted by Queen Maeve via her footage of the Flight 37 disaster and Stormfront being publicly exposed as a Nazi, Homelander spends his last appearance in Season 2 masturbating on top of a building, maniacally ranting on how he can do "whatever the fuck he wants".
Meaningful Name:
His moniker is probably meant to evoke "Homeland Security" with all the post-War on Terror and Patriot Act implications. Underscored when he performs an unlawful search on a truck with the explanation "If you've got nothing to hide, you've got nothing to fear," and his eagerness to get involved in foreign conflicts.
His 'human' name is John, a name that was often worn by emperors, kings and saints, befitting Homelander's status as the most powerful supe and his God Complex. There is also the fact that he often 'baptized' people, just like John the Baptist once did. As for the meaning of the name, it is 'God is gracious'; and Homelander is more or less a murderous Physical God who fakes being the ultimate force of good.
To the public, Homelander is an ultra-masculine, fiercely patriotic hero. His name is John, just like John Wayne, an actor best known for playing the same type of hero.
"John" carries a number of negative implications too. For example John Doe (the go-to placeholder name for a unidentified male corpse), touching on Homelander's identity issues. Also, a john is slang for a prostitute's client, possibly referencing his tendency to get involved with...less-than-ideal women, such as Madelyn Stillwell and Stormfront.
Given how Homelander is a Trumplica, "John" could also be interpreted as referencing Donald John Trump.
Men Don't Cry: A core part of his toxic masculinity mindset. He claims in the Season 2 finale that the last time he cried was when he was a little boy, but now he's a grown man so he's above such things. A mere few hours later after this, the loss of his lover and son drives him to tears.
The Mentally Disturbed: With each season passing, Homelander shows more and more signs of serious mental and emotional problems. He has got fits of violent rage, lack of empathy, mood swings, and talking to himself in the mirror.
Mirror Character: Is been always hinted through the show that Butcher and Homelander have similarities, but their usual arcs also made them different from each other, until Season 3, where Eric Kripke, confirms for 'Herogasm' breakdown that: "Homelander and Butcher are really like two sides of the same coin. Um, they have very similar arcs, you know in Episodes 1 and 2, you know, they both feel like aggrieved and their steam kettles are boiling and then they both finally explode in their own ways. And, in many ways, they are like the two poles of the show, you know. It's sorta like we talk about them sometimes as Superman likes Luther or Holmes/Moriarty like they're like the two centers of gravity. So, in their obsession with each other it's sort of inevitable that they start to kind of take on, you know, some of each other's traits".
Misanthrope Supreme: He is, he despises humans, and his plan with Sage is to create internment camps for humans.
Missing Mom: In the first episode, it's implied that him staring at Madelyn pumping milk is Power Perversion Potential, but "Good for the Soul" reveals he has severe mommy issues that she's aware of and more than happy to use to control him. She unbuttons her blouse, has him put his head in her lap, and mimes nursing by letting him suck her fingers. In Season 4, Homelander's mother is revealed to be a poor runaway who he accidentally killed by the time he was born.
Mook Horror Show: Homelander’s mission in Syria serves as the defining moment that reveals his madness and establishes that he is far from the all-American hero. In a brutal and terrifying display, he attacks a group of terrorists, methodically killing all of them in shocking ways. The entire scene is shrouded in darkness, with his glowing red eyes cutting through the shadows, creating an almost demonic image.
Morality Pet: His son Ryan is probably the only other person he actually cares about and in the Season 3 finale when he looked ready to fry the Boys, Butcher in particular, Ryan convinces him to leave instead.
Murder Is the Best Solution: If someone becomes a nuisance or provokes problems, Homelander won't hold back from killing them. He killed Mayor of Baltimore and all the passengers in his plane for attempting to blackmail Madelyn with leaking the existence of Compound V. He also ordered Dirk's, Greg's and Todd's deaths, lasered Anika through her head, and gave one of the most gruesome death to the Vought Scientists who were guilty for all of his pain as a solution to let go of his past.
Muscles Are Meaningless: He's rarely seen outside of his costume, but when he is, it turns out he's actually quite thin. This actually makes sense since he's had no reason to work out his entire life since he's already strong enough to throw vehicles around like toys. Even if he wanted to, he'd have to lift something comparable to a couple semi-trucks to challenge himself. This is also a clever way to incorporate the fact that Antony Starr has padding in his suit to make him fit the superhero build into the show. It would make sense that Vought would give him muscle inserts since he is basically the company mascot.
My Greatest Failure: Dr. Vogelbaum thinks of Homelander as this for him, saying he should have raised him with affection, not like a test subject in his lab, so that he might have been different. The normally snappy Homelander has no response to it, indicating it hit him quite deep.
Narcissist: Perfectly ticks every box on the list. He has absolutely no empathy or respect for anyone, yet he is defined by his massive but extremely fragile ego, and is dependent on the narcissistic supply provided by everyone around him. Any time someone insults his massive ego, he flies into a narcissistic rage that can only be calmed down by soothing his wounded pride. He also fits both the overt and covert definitions of narcissism as while his ego is genuine, it's also very fragile and meant to cover up the lack of true love he never received as a child, and there are implications that he's full of self-loathing very deep down.
Homelander yelling at Ryan: I've given you everything that I ever wanted and it's still not good enough for you!
Nemesis Magnet: And how. Homelander has attracted the ire of numerous characters throughout the series. His random acts of cruelty resulted in Billy Butcher becoming a Vigilante Man and Indira Shetty becoming a genocidal monster, his constant mistreatment of his team leads to Starlight, Queen Maeve, Supersonic, and even A-Train turning against him, and his true colors gradually being revealed causes his own son, Ryan, to lose any respect for him.
Never My Fault: With his temperament and immaturity, of course it never isn't. Ultimately, this is one of the very few traits that separate him from Billy Butcher, as the latter is capable of admitting his shortcomings and later tries to do better whereas Homelander is genuinely incapable of doing so due to his ego and victim complex and only continues to double down.
He accidentally kills a teenaged bystander when he lasers a Super terrorist (Which is also his fault). When he learns about it, he initially blows it off until he sees there are protestors rising against him for it. Then, in outrage and disbelief, calls them ungrateful, refuses to simply apologize even as an act and attempts to give a crappy justification for his actions.
In Season 4, he is upset that everyone around him is a sycophant who just agrees with everything he says. Apparently, he forgot about all the times he indirectly or directly threatened to murder them for contradicting him, or when he ousted Edgar because he wouldn’t suck up to him like everyone else.
He sobs to himself after A-Train betrays the Seven, asking how his former teammate could commit such an act... apparently not recalling every time he abused A-Train up to this point.
New Era Speech: In "Beware The Jabberwock, My Son", Homelander makes one to the newly assembled Supes in Vought Tower.
Homelander: What does it mean to be a hero? This country is corrupt beyond repair, so we've got to save it. We have to save America. We have to save the world for our kids. So I'm reaching out to you to do your part. Now, it's not gonna be easy. We'll... We'll have to do some terrible things. Some violent, merciless, maybe even cruel things. For the greater good. That's war. You'll no longer be beloved celebrities. You will be... Wrathful gods. When the time comes... Will you answer the call? (...) So, patriots... Show me a little wrath!
Nice Guy: The Season 1 finale of The Boys: Diabolical reveals he really was like Superman, once. Nowadays, despite PR appearances, he's far from it.
Nice Job Fixing It, Villain!: Sometimes he bullies people too hard, making them hit a point where they have nothing to lose. Nothing to lose means they have no fear. No fear means he's impotent against them as he can't bring himself to harm someone who truly isn't scared of him. He did this with Queen Maeve and he needed help from Black Noir to attack her.
Nigh-Invulnerability: Bullets don't do a thing against him. Neither does being caught in the explosion of Stillwell's residence. Stillwell claims everything possible in the world has already been thrown at him, and he's still alive. Season 3 reveals that it is possible to damage him, as he is left with a lasting bruise on his face after being briefly triple-teamed by Soldier Boy and super-empowered Butcher and Hughie. Appropriately enough, this means the only thing that has been shown to do any damage to Homelander is other Supes who are at least near his own Super Weight.
Nightmare Fetishist: Homelander takes sick pleasure out of both witnessing and committing sadistic acts of violence, and even appears to get off on it at times. His slow murder of a Syrian terrorist in the Season 1 finale is a good example of this.
The Nose Knows: A method he uses to detect if someone's lying or keeping secrets from him is to use his enhanced sense of smell to check if they've secretly met someone else by the scent of that someone. He figured out that Maeve met up with Butcher and hooked up with him and that Ryan visited Butcher behind his back using this superpower.
No Challenge Equals No Satisfaction: Despite finally having everything he ever wanted by the end of Season 3, his son, control of Vought, and public adoration, Season 4 reveals that Homelander is still unfulfilled. He confides in Sister Sage that none of it means anything to him anymore, admitting that total victory feels hollow because no one dares to oppose him. Sage bluntly tells him that even if he enslaved humanity, he’d still be miserable.
No-Sell: Butcher's bomb in Season 1 and Kenji bringing a whole ceiling down on his head in Season 2 seem to have done nothing to him as he is later shown unscathed. When Starlight or the supe that can make head explode ready their powers he tells them right away it's not gonna work on him.
No Social Skills: While he's really good at projecting a falsified image of himself, he's not as good when having to actually express himself. This is shown with Ryan, who is the only person that Homelander tries to be nice and comforting with, where Homelander stutters and takes a number of pauses in his talks whenever he's teaching or opening up to his son. It's also shown in his interactions with Black Noir, whom Homelander genuinely confides in sees as a friend, which he expresses with awkward body language and pauses on what he wants to say to him.
Not Good with Rejection: He never truly got over Maeve loving him or choosing other people over him. He always responded back with threatening and even killing the people Maeve shown romantic interest in.
Not His Sled: Unlike the comics, he really did rape Becca, instead of it being done by Black Noir, who was gaslighting him.
Not So Invincible After All: In Season 3, everyone learns that he is the World's Strongest Man for a reason, but he's not so far above them that there's no hope of victory. It turns out that his abilities have been massively hyped up beyond their actual scope in-universe, which is nothing new for Vought. Soldier Boy leaves him with a black eye, and Maeve destroys his left ear by jamming a metal straw into it. Maeve also bloodies him with her regular punches despite herself not being strong enough to lift a bus (she broke her arm trying to pull one up from a precipice).
Not So Similar: Like Starlight, Homelander is annoyed and angered over the fact the Seven can't do more and are basically playing expensive cops and robbers. Unlike Starlight, who feels like this for genuinely altruistic and heroic reasons, Homelander feels like this approach is limiting his worldwide options as an Attention Whore.
Not-So-Well-Intentioned Extremist: To the general public, Homelander is an American hero whose morally grey acts are done to strike back against "the woke mob" and preserve the country. To his inner circle, Homelander is a Visionary Villain who wants to create a better world for his fellow superhumans and free them from Vought's control. In private, Homelander is a complete megalomaniac with a god complex who truly just wants to Take Over the World so he can bask in the attention and adoration of everyone on Earth, and he doesn't care how many people— whether it be fellow Americans or his own supe kind— he has to abuse, torture, and/or murder to to do so.
Odd Friendship: With Sister Sage, a black woman. He personally brings her onto the team and fosters a working partnership that, despite his volatile nature, appears functional. While not without petty moments, Sage is one of the few people Homelander tolerates being challenged by without taking it as an insult or humiliation. He often listens to her advice, engages in snarky exchanges with a relaxed demeanor, and doesn’t react violently to her wit, something unheard of for most others. Homelander gets truly furious at her only when he discovers Sage hid A-Train's role in leaking the incriminating video of the dead bodies.
Oh, Crap!: He's a walking invocation of this trope. People who know what a monster he actually is are usually terrified in his presence. Justified; if he is paying attention to you and he's not motivated to play the hero, there's nothing he wouldn't do to you.
Omnicidal Maniac: He promises to Starlight he will destroy New York, her hometown, and even Maeve's old village towns in the event that his involvement in the Flight 37 crash is exposed to the public, before moving on to burn down the rest of the planet.
One-Hit Kill: His beams always obliterate its targets into nothing upon contact, leaving behind just a chaotic mess of viscera.
One-Man Army: Takes out a cell of Middle Eastern Terrorists all by himself while the armed forces watch on from outside the building.
Only One Name: His non-supe name lacks a surname.
The Only One Allowed to Defeat You: Despite wanting him dead, Homelander shows a strange fixation on Butcher, treating him as a worthy opponent rather than just another enemy. He doesn't even seem to hate Billy, and sees Butcher as the only person who is allowed to challenge or potentially defeat him.
OOC Is Serious Business:
Upon watching a news broadcast of the revived Soldier Boy accidentally going nuclear in the middle of a Manhattan street, Homelander is visibly afraid for the first time of another person that he completely loses focus of the conversation happening around him and struggles to recompose himself after.
For the first time in his life, he genuinely thanks Starlight for coming and supporting him for a show, when everybody else is gone. Even Starlight is shocked by his gesture.
When Soldier Boy tries to attack Ryan, Butcher and Homelander team up to protect him, even though they utterly despise each other. Both are noticeably shocked at just how much their paternal instincts overrode their animosity.
He's also noticeably gracious, and even apologetic, towards Sage in the season 4 finale when she reveals that she'd continued plotting his ascent to power even after he fired her.
Despite being pathologically hungry for praise and adoration, he noticeably doesn't derive joy from The Deep sycophantically fawning over him, being nothing but very uncomfortable with the latter's proclamation that he'll sell out anyone just to stay in the former's good graces.
A strong sign that Homelander's Sanity Slippage has dangerously accelerated by Season 5; after declaring that he no longer needs him to carry on his legacy since he plans on living forever now, Homelander beats the living shit out of Ryan and- even more shockingly- just leaves him for dead on the ground and doesn't even attempt to bring him back to the Tower with him. Even at his absolute lowest in the past, his one somewhat consistent positive trait was his genuine (if self-serving) care for Ryan. It all adds up to show that, this time, he truly has finally lost it.
Order vs. Chaos: Homelander and Sister Sage have this dynamic despite working together. Where Homelander acts on impulse, emotion, and ego, Sage plans meticulously, controlling situations behind the scenes and shaping events to her advantage. Unknown to him, Sage was making use of his destructive tendencies to achieve their goals.
Papa Wolf:
He abandons all love he had for Soldier Boy being his father the moment Soldier Boy attempts to murder Ryan for reflexively attacking him to protect Homelander.
At the end of the third season finale when a heckler throws a can at Ryan in the crowd of people, Homelander pulls his son behind him protectively before lasering the offender to death, very well possibly risking his status in a crowd of people.
Averted following some further Sanity Slippage and his god complex getting worse. After becoming obsessed with the idea of becoming immortal through obtaining V1, Homelander's narcissism advances to the point that he stops caring about Ryan's well-being at all, to the point where he beats him within an inch of his life himself and leaves him for dead when the boy rightfully attacks him upon discovering he raped his mother. He doesn't even bother to take him with him back to the Tower.
Paper Tiger: Downplayed. While far from a weakling, his strength and especially invulnerability turn out to be massively exaggerated in-universe. The Boys believed that they'd need to find a super-weapon capable of damaging him, and Maeve is incredulous that he could be killed by anything short of a nuclear weapon. While he is exceptionally resilient against anything civilians like them could reasonably get their hands on (like small arms and improvised explosives), the season reveals it's not really that hard to hurt him. Punches that (when they miss him) merely make fist-sized indents in concrete or dent thin metal sheets can bruise and bloody him, and it's shown that his skin can even be pierced by a metal straw with some super-strength behind it.
Parents as People:
In Season 2, Homelander actually tries to be a decent father to Ryan. Unfortunately, he is forced to use his made-up past with mixed results, though he does become emotional when he starts to explain how using his powers were difficult in an effort to bond with his son after Ryan had trouble using his heat vision and getting agitated by a large crowd and loud noise. Unfortunately for Homelander, it doesn't stick for long.
Deconstructed in Season 4. Homelander may be reunited with Ryan and is continuing to try and be a good parent to him, but his narcissism, jealousy over Ryan's relationship with Billy, stunted empathy, and Super Supremacist leanings, coupled with Ryan repeatedly straying away from what his father expects of him, ultimately causes him to treat the boy with a combination of possessiveness, neglect, and borderline emotional abuse. As he states himself, he can't fathom why Ryan is so "ungrateful" and vulnerable despite having everything Homelander would have wanted as a child.
Pay Evil unto Evil: In "Wisdom of the Ages", Homelander vengefully kills most of the scientists who experimented on him as a child by giving them punishments similar to the torture and humiliations he endured from them, and made him the monster he is today.
Perfection Is Impossible: Homelander dreams of creating a "cleansed" world where supes reign supreme and no longer bow to humanity, envisioning it as a perfect utopia for himself and his son to inherit.
The Perfectionist: Homelander’s split personality, as revealed in his mirror conversations, embodies this mentality. This darker, more ruthless side insists that Homelander must fully abandon his lingering humanity—the part of him that still craves love and acceptance—in order to become "pure and clean like marble."
Performance Anxiety: Whenever someone shows a genuine lack of fear of him, he can't bring himself to pummel them, laser them, or kill them, any of the many other ways he does to someone he can intimidate. He can't even threaten them. Even when he managed to remove Stan Edgar from his position of power, Edgar was still able to belittle him and walk away without a scratch, leaving him to stew in his impotence. In Season 3, he could only talk to Butcher, who lost what little fear he had in the last season. He only killed Stillwell after she admitted she was terrified of him. When Maeve finally stands up, telling him she always hated and even pitied him, he can't bring himself to attack her and needs Black Noir to do it for him. For all his talk about preferring to be loved, he actually relishes being feared. He's completely dependent on it like oxygen.
Person of Mass Destruction: To the point that Deputy Director Raynor doesn't want him prosecuted for his crimes, as he has the potential to kill "thousands" if he is angered.
The Peter Principle:
Homelander may be a hero to the public and the most powerful being in the world, but he is terrible at thinking about how his actions affect others. He tries to sever ties with Vought, only to be reminded by Edgar that it would be a terrible idea since Vought has been protecting him from the consequences of his actions since he was a child. When he tries to quell an anti-war movement, he fails and fantasizes about killing the crowd, only to snap back into reality and float away after calling them all "The real heroes". It's clear to the crowd that "The real heroes" line is just a weightless statement that Vought taught him for PR purposes, as they still hate him when he uses it. He has a mental breakdown from all the attention and starts a relationship with Stormfront, who enables his worst actions. It then backfires horribly for him as Stormfront is outed as a Nazi and Homelander is forced to do cleanup so that the public doesn't completely turn against him.
When he ousts Edgar and takes over Vought, it's clear from the first few minutes that Homelander has no idea how to run a company, as he is completely blindsided by an accountant asking for EBITDA. Homelander has to threaten her to keep the rest of the accountants in line, but secretly wonders to himself if taking over the company was a bad idea all along.
Pet the Dog:
He spares Starlight after she fails him because Maeve begged him to.
He seems to genuinely care for Ryan, at least as far as a sociopathic personality can genuinely care for someone. At one point, he leaves a crowd of adoring fans just to help his son deal with an anxiety attack, and he later mercilessly slaughters the Vought strike team he believes had already taken him.
Subverted when he assures Ryan that Becca's death wasn't his fault. Ryan interprets this as Homelander understanding that he didn't mean to kill his mother, but what Homelander actually means is that Humans are Insects and thus aren't worth feeling bad over. A similar scenario happens in Season 4 when Ryan accidentally kills Koy, but this time he realizes why Homelander is so forgiving, much to his horror.
When he discovers that Soldier Boy is his biological father, Homelander goes out of his way to try to bring him to his side and genuinely opens up to him about his desire to be a family with him and Ryan.
Overall, he does have a soft spot for Maeve - despite capturing her when learning of her and Annie's attempted coup against him, he never actually hurts her, and during their fight in the Season 3 finale, he genuinely tells her that he doesn't want to fight or hurt her; it's only after she actually does some significant damage to him that he finally fights back.
During his Reddit AMA, he mentioned that he actually liked A-Train's brief foray into music. From a guy so obsessed with keeping himself on top, publicly appreciating his teammate's creative aspirations is quite surprising.
Downplayed as it's still rather cruel, but despite having a Berserk Button over being lied to, he seemingly can't bring himself to kill Sister Sage after learning that she knew A-Train the leaker, instead just firing her. He even tells her she should count herself lucky that he is sending her back in one piece.
Photographic Memory: Downplayed. When confronting the scientific team who ran terrible experiments on him in his youth, Homelander identifies them all by name, as well as noting that some have since been replaced, and recounts two horrific instances of their abuse against him (one of which the man had completely forgotten) while taking his vengeance on them.
Photo Op with the Dog: An absolute master of this trope, Homelander very rarely breaks his image of the All-American Hero archetype when it comes to appearing in the media. But when the cameras aren't rolling on him, he doesn't hold back.
Pitiful Worms: Refers to humans as "mud people" that should be worshipping him.
Playing the Victim Card: By Season 3, he's gone full victim mode after his polls go down as a result of his association with Stormfront, with a fondness for the word "persecution." He outright compares himself to Jesus and Martin Luther King Jr. as to how one can give their whole lives in service of others and receive nothing but scorn in response. The comparisons fall flat since Jesus selflessly gave his life for others without expecting a reward, and Dr. King had legitimate grievances about how black people were treated in America while always making sure the civil rights movement was nonviolent (never mind Homelander's own casual racism). Homelander is just mad that people aren't automatically giving him love and are mad about him killing innocent civilians and knowingly jumping into bed with a Nazi.
Pointy-Haired Boss: Proves himself, predictably, to be the "inexperienced and ruthless" type as Vought CEO, with a heavy dose of Bad Boss. He initiates his first board meeting by having everyone introduce themselves to him, in a transparent attempt to hear some flattery about what a great new leader he'll be; Maureen, however, uses her opportunity to speak to ask an innocent and sincere question about how best to spin their EBITDA margins dipping slightly in the wake of the power transfer. Homelander — confronted with the fact that he has no idea what the hell he's doing, and furious that a non-powered woman knows even slightly more about business than he does — singles her out as wanting his job, and Ashley fires her to avoid him murdering the woman. He later lays off the head of the Crime Analytics Division, replaces her with The Deep, and fires everyone at Vought who's written tweets even mildly critical of himself.
Politically Incorrect Villain: He refers to Arabs as "camel jockeys", quips about Africans all being unable to afford food, maims/kills a Seven prospect who is blind because he doesn't want a "cripple" on his team, and refuses to let Silver Kincaid on the Seven simply because she's a Muslim. Additionally, Homelander's constant quips that Becca is raising Ryan to be a pussy or "like a girl" strongly indicate he's a misogynist, while he's taken part in anti-gay campaigns, and upon finding out about Maeve's bisexuality, he outs her publicly to humiliate her. He still comes off as less bigoted than Stormfront, however, as he Hates Everyone Equally, he's just not above using racialized, gendered, and sexual identity-based insults, and notably feels uncomfortable with Stormfront's racist perspective even though he's willing to begrudgingly tolerate it for his own ends.
Post-Rape Taunt: He claims to Billy that Becca enjoyed their "time" together so much that she orgasmed three times in as many hours together. His lack of sexual prowess puts the claim in doubt though. When he starts visiting Becca and Ryan, he's not subtle about verbally bullying her.
Powerful and Helpless: This is how he ends Season 2. Maeve reveals she has footage of the Flight 37 incident and threatens to leak it if he doesn't do what she wants, which would destroy the public's adoration of him. In the end, he's trapped as a pawn of Vought. His final scene is him pathetically masturbating while claiming he can do "whatever the fuck he wants".
Power Perversion Potential: He uses his X-Ray Vision to watch Stillwell pump breast milk.
Powers Do the Fighting: Homelander's formidable powerset, such as flight and destructive eye beams, has rendered him largely impervious to conventional threats. His physical appearance even reflects this; Homelander lacks the heroic build of a superhero, meaning he never really trained because he always relied on his powers. He will also engage in a physical fight only if he doesn't have a choice.
Pragmatic Villainy: Homelander is callously pragmatic and will immediately cut people out of his life and abandons others when it seems to be the most practical option.
He bars Blindspot from entering The Seven because he believes that Blindspot is too much a liability to fight. As demonstrated by Homelander, if Blindspot's eardrums are destroyed then he will be at a major disadvantage in the battlefield. He kicks A-Train out of The Seven because his drug use has weakened his bones and affected his heart, making him a liability as a hero of The Seven since he no longer has his superhuman endurance and stamina for the battlefield. Now the Seven are mostly doing stage rescues and are not supposed to meet the battlefield (with the exception of Homelander which ended in a P.R nightmare after he killed an innocent and Black Noir whose mission are covert and according to Singer should be put on trial for war crimes) but Homelander sees the Seven as his team and wants the strongest among them.
When confronted by a bunch of protesters against him for his war crimes, he has thoughts of massacring a group of protesters just to silence them, but decides to fly off and leave, noting that this kind of move will cause bad publicity with Vought and himself.
Flight 37 is another example, as he immediately abandons all the passengers when he realizes that he can't rescue them without breaking the plane. To Homelander, they would have died either way and he needed to use the failed mission to get Supes into the military.
He somewhat plays along with Stormfront's Nazi ideology, despite not being a Nazi. While he is definitely a believer in a master race, that being the Supes, he couldn't care less about what color that "master race" would be. It's clear he does it for the sake of their relationship, and to keep her on his side, but he's also visibly annoyed whenever Stormfront starts talking about white supremacy.
Despite Butcher being his Arch-Enemy, he is willing to partner up with him for the time being to protect Ryan from Soldier Boy.
Prefers Proper Names: He insists on calling Billy Butcher by his real first name, William.
Pride: He suffers from deep Narcissistic Personality Disorder, seeing himself as a godly entity superior to the whole of humanity and any supe. His powers and sense of entitlement have led him to exhibit extreme megalomania, causing him to commit crimes against innocent people, including acts of rape and mass murder, out of the idea that he can do anything he wants because of who he is.
Primary-Color Champion: Invoked by his choice of costume, with has blue, red, and yellow/gold colors, but is more an example of how Bright Is Not Good.
Privilege Makes You Evil: What really causes Homelander to become the depraved, Ax-Crazy Evil Hero in the present is, in addition to his Dark and Troubled Past being Raised in a Lab, being showered with praise and having any of his screw-ups covered up by Vought International for over 20 years.
Properly Paranoid:
He's the only one who takes Translucent's disappearance seriously, and correctly perceives it as the first step in a war against himself, even though everyone else thinks it's just him being an attention hog as usual.
Despite everyone brushing off Soldier Boy's return in New York, Homelander is terrified for the first time as he believes Soldier Boy is after him. "Herogasm" proves him correct.
—Homelander: William Butcher and Soldier Boy. Of course. You are behind this. This whole thing. It really is all about me.
Psychological Projection: After Ryan accidentally kills Koy, Homelander tries to cheer him up with a milkshake and immediately assumes he's just upset over the bad publicity, not the fact that he murdered an innocent man. He then attempts to ease his nerves by espousing his Super Supremacist rhetoric, immediately assuming that alone will ease the boy's nerves. Between this, and later admitting that he can't understand why Ryan is so ungrateful despite having everything Homelander would have wanted growing up, it's clear he really just sees his son as an extension of himself, and for that projects his own insecurities and ideologies onto him.
Psychopathic Manchild: Comes through most clearly in his interactions with Stillwell. It's still made clear his actions are essentially those of an absolutely deranged schoolyard bully or an angry toddler who lashes out whenever doesn't get what he wants. The difference, however, is that this toddler is six feet even, immune to everything, can bench a jet liner, and shoot lasers from his eyes. Even Edgar describes him as such, and Garth Ennis himself seems to think of Homelander as this:
Ennis: (describing Homelander) "It might help to think of the Homelander as having all the self-control of, let's say, a fourteen-year-old."
Puppy-Dog Eyes: Homelander shows an uncharacteristic side when he learns that Firecracker has been taking drugs to induce milk production solely to please him. His eyes become wide and teary.
Pyrrhic Victory: Despite becoming the defacto ruler of the United States and having an army of supes at his disposal, he only managed to achieve it by Sage's manipulations, while losing Ryan due to his overly controlling behavior.
Questionable Consent: One Plus One Equals Two implies Madelyn might have groomed Homelander to start a sexual incestuous relationship with her long before he was 18. She touches a young impressionable Homelander in a very seductive way while manipulating his desire for attention, which provokes Homelander an erection. He is rather uncomfortable than excited.
Rage Breaking Point: Homelander rips apart Webweaver because he feels something is still off about him being the mole; the brutal way he kills Webweaver seems to be done in frustration with that.
Raised in a Lab: Homelander was raised in a lab throughout his childhood. The constant feeling of isolation he felt, and the accidental murders of others, played a key part in making him into what he is today.
Rank Scales with Asskicking: He is the most powerful person in the Seven and the leader.
Rape Is a Special Kind of Evil:
It is stated in the show that Homelander raped and killed Billy's wife, Becca. Although her initial reaction to seeing Homelander in the Season 1 finale seemed to be normal and unfazed, she confirms it was indeed rape, and the experience left her so terrified she cut a deal with Vought and ran off with their son to get away from him.
In season three, when he fakes a romantic relationship with Starlight, he not so subtly suggests to Hughie just to enrage him that he would like to try his luck with Starlight.
Red Eyes, Take Warning: His eye beams are red when used, but he is also able to make his eyes glow red without actually doing any damage, which he does in between blasts or simply to intimidate. In any case, you do not want to get his attention when his eyes are glowing. And unlike Superman, he's much more liberal with their usage.
Later on, it's shown that his eyes uncontrollably start to glow red when he is extremely angry.
Relative Button:
Do not remind him of Stormfront's death or insult her in his presence. He forces a suicidal woman to jump off a building after learning of Stormfront's suicide and when a man insults Stormfront on his birthday, Homelander looks like he is about to tear the poor stupid bastard limb from limb and proceeds to make a speech about how ungrateful the world is to have him.
One of his few redeeming features is that he genuinely craves and treasures genuine affection through blood ties, and keeping either his heritage or legacy secret from him will guarantee you a gruesome death, which Madelyn Stillwell by hiding his son's existence and Black Noir by hiding that Soldier Boy was his father learned the hard way.
Religious Bruiser: Subverted. Homelander only fakes being an agent of God who fights against non-believers to gain followers. In reality, the only being he perceives as a God is himself.
The Resenter: For all his espousing of Super Supremacist ideology, it's implied that Homelander is secretly a Green-Eyed Monster who envies and despises the humans he mocks for having the love and acceptance he desires so desperately but is unable to have thanks to his malformed upbringing and his own outrageous, narcissistic sociopathy. He develops an amused, cool disposition towards Butcher and Starlight as he sees both as a Worthy Opponent, but of every character in the series it's actually Hughie he seems to loathe the most for being the most prominent and baffling example he's come across of this. Hughie has so many people who love him, who would die for him, despite being The Everyman and seemingly unremarkable, and it drives Homelander insane that this apparently useless "mud person" is the one who has everything he wants.
Reverse Arm-Fold: Homelander's default body position.
Sad Clown: A dark example. Underneath his macabre sense of humor, it's made clear that Homelander is a broken mess of a man, right down from being raised as a lab experiment to his deep-seated need for love and approval.
Sadist: He gets a lot of enjoyment out of emotionally tormenting people around him. See how he treats Billy in general and Maeve after he finds out her true sexuality. The most notable example is his slow murder of a Syrian terrorist, where he first slices his legs off, and then instead of finishing him off quickly, slowly crushes his skull under his foot. And he does this all with a smile.
Sanity Has Advantages: Homelander's resources and superpowers would be enough for him to take over the world fast but his pathological need for love, sadism, and insecurities give the Boys a fighting chance.
Sanity Slippage: Homelander was already quite unhinged by the time he was introduced, but part of his arc is him slipping even further and spiraling towards an eventual meltdown that everyone who knows his true colors is dreading.
The death of Stormfront, the blackmail, and the constant control from Vought has started eroding Homelander's sanity and making him even more hostile and unpredictable. He attacks A-Train when the latter whispers "Fuck You" under his breath, he forces a woman to jump off a building, nearly tears a heckler limb from limb during his birthday, and threatens to destroy America when Starlight tries to remind him of her blackmail.
The revelation that Soldier Boy is alive, and the subsequent fight against him, Butcher and Hughie that goes downhill for Homelander does an even greater number to his already dwindling sanity, now that he finally has met opponents who can match him in strength and actually nearly killed him too in a three-on-one. The fact he degrades into animalistic snarls towards the latter half of the fight shows how far from sane he is now.
The Final Season throws setback after setback for him that begin to rapidly accelerate his mental decline. Starting off with him still being deeply unhappy that there remain millions of people who hate him across the world, being personally told to his face by A-Train and Soldier Boy (again) that he's pathetic and worthless sets him down an even darker path. He begins to have open Hallucinations of the deceased Madelyn Stillwell as an angel telling him to take his rightful place in the world as an immortal god and that he needs to kill babies and skin people alive if that's what it takes to get them to submit.
Halfway through the season, his most troubling sign of mental decline comes with his treatment of Ryan, however; previously his Morality Pet and one of the only people he showed even a modicum of genuine (if self-serving) care for, Homelander decides that he no longer needs him to carry on his legacy since he now plans to live forever, and he proceeds to beat him within an inch of his life and leave him for dead on the ground. Even at his lowest in the past, it's hard to imagine him not even bothering to at least take Ryan with him- showing how far he's fallen already.
Satanic Archetype: As DEATH BATTLE! points out, Homelander is pretty much the closest thing to Lucifer on Earth. Like the most powerful of God's Angels, Homelander is regarded as the strongest Supe alive. He has a massive ego, a god complex, represents all Seven Deadly Sins, especially Pride, and like a winged angel, can fly, being especially notable as one of the few supes who can. As of Season 3, the phrase "better to reign in Hell than serve in Heaven" applies to him all too well, as he takes over Vought despite slowly running it into the ground. He also settles for being feared rather than beloved, similar to Satan's fame through infamy, and when he starts to reveal his true self, he's delighted to find that many people actually react positively, all too similar to devil-worshippers. He even tries to groom his only child into following his footsteps and seems to be making headway by Season 3's end.
Screw the Rules, I Make Them!: After brutally crippling Blindspot, Homelander lectures Ashley about bringing a cripple into the Seven. He reminds her that it was he who kept her in the company and, as such, she answers to him and only him. Homelander declares that he will take full control of the narrative from now on. He orders Ashley to report everything that happens on the 99th floor, from every move the team makes to every decision made. With a subtle implication that she has no agency, he makes it clear that she no longer will decide who joins the Seven, but him.
Screw Yourself: Defied by Homelander. Doppelganger shapeshifts into Homelander and is about to have sex with him until they start talking about how much Homelander draws his strength from the attention and praise of others accidentally touching a sensitive spot. Homelander, enraged, kills Doppelganger with no hesitation.
Secret Identity: While The Seven have generally given up on maintaining these, Homelander has an Inversion of this. Vought and marketing have him fake his childhood and go by the name "John," while he really operates as a superhero 24/7 and only answers to the name "Homelander".
Security Blanket: Homelander freaks out when he sees a blanket in his fake childhood home. Turns out he was raised in a lab, where the blanket was his only comfort as a young child.
Series Mascot: Both In and out of Universe. In-Universe, Homelander was always the face of Vought and their most popular superhero since the creation of the Seven. Out of universe, he is probably the most known character of the show to the wide audience.
Seven Deadly Sins: Homelander commits all seven sins during the course of the series:
Wrath: He's generally violent, impatient, intolerant, and is prone to throwing temper tantrums when things don't go his way.
Pride: Homelander is incredibly narcissistic, seeing himself as a godly entity superior to both humans and supes alike. In Homelandre's Thus leading him to the idea that he can do anything he wants because of who he is.
Sloth: Homelander has no real combat skills and depends completely on his superpowers. His laziness with his eye beam usage is what would end up causing the Flight 37 disaster, for example.
Greed: He's violently possessive towards anything and anyone he declares his property, as is shown in his interactions with Queen Maeve, Madelyn and Ryan.
Lust: Homelander has perverse sexual desires as seen in his relationships with Madelyn and Stormfront. He is especially fond of breastfeeding and mommy play. He also doesn't care about consent as indicated by his rape of Becca. The Season 2 finale shows him masturbating atop a skyscraper to raise his self-esteem and makes a bed-ridden Stormfront give him a hand job to relieve his frustration.
Envy: Homelander is very bitter over Madelyn's affection towards her baby Teddy, due to his Oedipus Complex, and treats Queen Maeve and his son Ryan more as pieces of property than individuals, disliking their relationships with other people outside of him.
Gluttony: He really likes milk...any kind. In fact, drinking some from a cow is enough to send him into a state of bliss he has to be startled out of.
Shabby Heroes, Well-Dressed Villains: Homelander always wears his pristine hero gear which rarely gets destroyed, while The Boys always wear outworn street-level practical clothing.
Shadow Archetype:
To Billy Butcher — Homelander and Butcher share many traits (Hair-Trigger Temper, It's All About Me, and being Manipulative Bastards), but Butcher is far more grounded in reality due to actually having a decent family (for the most part) and friends that will take him to task about his bad decisions, while Homelander never had a stable environment due to growing up in a lab and is so powerful that anyone who tries to criticize him is quickly cowed into submission.
To Starlight as well — As of Season 4 she basically became Homelander's heroic Distaff Counterpart, while Homelander is everything Annie could have been if her mother treated her only as a product and was groomed to be a psychotic narcissist. She is blonde, can shoot beams and fly. They both were stated to be genuinely noble and heroic in their childhoods, but Annie remained that way into her adulthood too, while Homelander became the homicidal egomaniac that we know. Even their first mission to save someone happened under similar circumstances, with innocent people taken as prisoners and them accidentally harming someone because they did not have full control of their powers. Annie had no one to cover for her mistakes, while Homelander grew in time careless and apathetic because he always had Black Noir to cover for his mistakes. In present they are bitter enemies and represent opposite ideals in the American society.
Signature Move: His Eye Beams. If that doesn't work, he likes to gut his enemies with his fists.
Sink-or-Swim Mentor: Season 2 shows him being one towards his son; throwing him from a roof to awaken his powers. Becca is horrified once she finds an unconscious Ryan, despite Homelander being dismissive of her concerns ("It was only a twenty foot fall!").
Sketchy Successor: Given that both have a patriotic theme and are/were The Leader of their respetive teams, Homelander was intended to replace Soldier Boy as Vought's headliner hero.
Slasher Smile: He sports one pretty much every time he smiles.
Slave to PR: An extreme example. Homelander's ego is so dependent on his image and the adulation of the public that he can be manipulated by threatening it. A major turning point in Season 3 is the fact that he's reaching the point he'll settle for accepting the tarnishing of that beloved reputation and becoming feared rather than loved to get what he wants.
Sleek High-Rise Apartment: Homelander owns an enormous three-story penthouse apartment in the Seven Tower, with an American flag spread across one wall with. The main open area contains statues and a balcony with an architecture reminiscent of the White House.
Smarter Than You Look: Vought and the Boys often assume he's a dumb brute who just uses force and his extreme powers to handle every situation. While he is brutal, what makes him threatening is the fact that he's actually rather on the ball and is extremely good at thinking on the fly; he just has enough powers to not need his native wits a lot.
The Sociopath: Homelander puts up the image of an ideal, benevolent hero, but this is nothing more than a facade — to his core, he is a cruel, remorseless, self-absorbed Narcissist who truly cares little about those he sees as beneath him and is perfectly willing to commit horrible atrocities for his own amusement, self-gratification, or to further his goals. While his dynamics with Black Noir, Stillwell, Stormfront, and his son Ryan indicate that he is at least partially capable of developing positive feelings for other people, his egotism and bloodthirstiness always gets in the way of him having truly healthy relationships with them, as he has no issue killing Noir and Stillwell when they cross him, makes Stormfront's death about himself, and ends up treating Ryan rather poorly in Season 4 due to his own selfishness and ego. Even his desire to be loved is very self-obsessive and something he aims to move past, making it clear to Starlight that he is fully willing to make the world burn once he has nothing to lose.
Spanner in the Works: It turns out Edgar had a long-term plan to get Supes into national defense, all without having to risk Compound V being exposed. Homelander, Manchild that he is, screws up this plan by creating Supe Terrorists to make it happen quicker and practically exposing the formula to the government, and later the general public as a result. Unlike with most examples, Edgar does not let this slide and promptly puts Homelander in his place when he tries throwing his weight around against him.
Speed Sex: Physical God he is, Sex God he is not. He lasts a whopping 45 seconds from insertion to ejaculation with Stillwell, much to his embarrassment. He does seem to do a lot better with Stormfront, though.
Spell My Name with a "The": Downplayed. He's officially known as the Homelander, but that part of his name is more casually omitted compared to the likes of the Deep.
Split Personality: Very heavily implied in Herogasm when he has a conversation with his own reflection, one where he's visibly on the defensive from the antagonistic and aggressive mirror. His reflection seems to confirm Homelander hasn't been the only occupant in his head for a while by mentioning when they were kids in "the bad room" and how he got them through it, constantly referring to himself as a separate entity and referring to them both with plural pronouns. In Season 4, it's indicated that he has more than just the one seen in that episode, as he speaks to multiple reflections of himself in a shattered mirror that seem to represent the different aspects of his complicated psyche.
Spoiled Brat: Homelander was gifted with the power to be an apex predator and the mass approval from the public turned him into an egotistical psychopath with a god complex and an adolescent state of maturity. He's a spoiled child in the body of an adult because he was given immense power at birth and his first killing spree was covered up by Black Noir. Because of these factors, Homelander never needed to grow up or mentally mature because he could always do whatever he wanted and nobody is able to say no to him.
The Spook: Marvin notes he has no public records about anything. It's because he was raised in a lab as an experiment.
Stage Dad: After revealing Ryan to the public, he and the rest of Vought go all in on setting the boy up as the next big thing. Ryan, what with his heavily sheltered background, is flustered by all the attention, but goes along with it for his dad's sake. But even though he's pushing for it, Homelander can't stand it when Ryan gets any of the limelight on his own (especially when people gush over his youthfulness).
The Starscream: While serving as The Dragon to Stillwell for the entire first season, he's notably frustrated with this position until he ultimately kills Stillwell in the finale. While he's put in his place by Stan Edgar, who has less tolerance for his arrogance and actions than Stillwell, he manages to succeed at this again in Season 3 by getting him kicked out of the company, replacing him with Ashley as his Puppet Queen CEO.
Start of Darkness: Homelander had a rough childhood where he was barely treated better than a lab rat, but his true moment of moral decay was when he accidentally killed all the hostages in his first mission and Black Noir covered for him.
Stealth Hi/Bye: Despite not being the Batman knockoff, he is quite skilled at doing this.
Stepford Smiler: The Unstable type. As the Vought-manufactured personification of American exceptionalism and its associated values, Homelander's public image embodies the purity, patriotism and all-embracing benevolence befitting of a nationally beloved superhero. In reality, he is an Ax-Crazy megalomaniac who expects unquestioned worship from those around him and sadistically abuses his powers at the expense of anyone unfortunate enough to cross his path.
Story-Breaker Power: His Flight and Super-Speed abilities. He's been breaking the sound barrier in the skies since he was 8 years old, and possibly more importantly, his acceleration is incredibly fast. He doesn't need to build it up much, he can just go from 0 to 400+ m/s in a matter of seconds. As he points out to Starlight, it doesn't actually matter if he's invulnerable because his ability to just fly straight to important logistical centers, destroy them, and fly back out before anyone can respond can't really be effectively countered. When he starts losing a fight for the first time in his life to Soldier Boy and Butcher's tag-team, he simply flies away, and they're unable to follow him. It doesn't help that air-to-air ordnance precise enough to hit a supersonic human-sized target basically doesn't exist; the usual strategy for air-to-air weapons is to use fragmentation and blast waves from missiles detonated in close proximity. This is nowhere near as powerful as a direct hit from an anti-armor weapon, but since planes and helicopters are relatively fragile, it balances out. But this obviously wouldn't work on a Nigh-Invulnerable human-sized target like Homelander.
Straight Edge Evil: Apparently alone among the Seven, he doesn't use his status to indulge in hedonistic pursuits. Unlike the typical use of this trope, it does little to make him more appealing. As he's the most power-hungry and sociopathic of the Seven, it just emphasizes even more how remote from humanity he is. As well, while others merely engage in drugs and sex parties, he instead has a disturbing sexual interest in Madelyn, Queen Maeve, and Stormfront in a Darwinist Desire kind of way. He also previously raped Becca Butcher. Plus, it's also highly likely that his "drug" would be the endless adoration he receives from the public as the #1 Superhero.
Stronger Than They Look: Sure, outside of his costume padded with fake muscles, Homelander lacks the Heroic Build typical to superheroes, but he is still arguably the world's strongest Supe, and a walking tyke bomb on top of that.
Stupid Evil: Homelander may claim he's smart (and to be fair, he does have a good amount of cunningness), but he's still prone to making mistakes due to his impatience, narcissism, and psychological instability. It's especially prominent in Season 4, even with Sister Sage helping him, as his already fucked-up Sanity Slippage is taking a further dive:
He forces Sage into the public role as an official member of the Seven, completed with tight spandex, both as petty revenge for her Brutal Honesty and to make sure she knows who is in charge. Putting aside the hypocrisy on his part given that he came to her first for help after being tired of everyone's sycophancy (which he also ignores the fact that everyone is only like that out of fear of him killing them if they do so much as politely disagree with his wishes), such a tactic would make Sage's role as The Man Behind the Man and their goals of staging a coup in America harder to work due to millions of eyes now on her presence. Despite Sage pointing out this fact, Homelander brushes it aside and responds that popularity is also a power.
When interrogating Anika on who leaked the security footage that proved the two Starlighters' innocence, Homelander instantly kills her before getting her full confession (which would have mentioned A-Train's involvement), believing she was the one who leaked the footage. Sage rightfully calls him out on this since now they lost a possible lead.
During their meeting with Victoria, when Sage tells Victoria they'll handle Singer for her if she promises more power to the Supes in the country, Homelander adds that she needs to reveal she's also a Supe to everyone in the country. Victoria is against it and points out that Singer is connected with the military and it would lead to a civil war, but Homelander doesn't care. After learning that Hughie has been spying on them and Homelander tries to kill him, she points out that if he dies, then the Boys will expose her secret to the world, which he doesn't care again and thinks it's best for her to finally not have this secret anymore, despite the fact having her secrets exposed before the election is certified will definitely ruin her chance to become President, which will make Sage's requests impossible.
When trying to win over the Real Life Federalist Society and Far-Right attendees during Tek Knight's party for his planned coup for America, Homelander does his usual anti-woke rants like saying Singer will replace them with "transexual illegals" as he would usually do with his loyal followers. However, none of them are fooled or convinced, with one woman telling him to "Save the boogeyman shit for the idiots watching VNN.", and quickly poke many holes in Homelander's plan and press issues that he would never have to consider such as the economy, military affairs, international relations, unions, etc. Unsurprisingly, Homelander ultimately can do little else but stand still like a deer in headlights until Victoria finally bails him out.
By the start of The Insider, Homelander has approved an anti-Woke Christmas special singing about reporting parents and friends if they are even suspected of being Antifa, and unconvincely assuring Ryan to go along with it. By this point, any subtly regarding his planned coup has been thrown out of the building like a brick, and turning Christmas into another cultural war is the last straw for Ryan, who nearly confessed to the public of his father's truer colors on TV.
When interrogating Webweaver, Homelander ultimately kills him in a gruesome manner after being both convinced of Patrick being The Mole and understandably annoyed by his constant web shooting from anxiety. However, much like with Anika and worse in this prospect, Webweaver is well-known in the Supe community for being a junkie who would say anything to get his next fix and so addled during his interrogation that anyone could see he was a mess, and nowhere near capable of the competence that a mole would need. Once again, Sage calls Homelander out on this when learning about Webweaver's death.
Then, after learning that Sage was keeping him in the dark about A-Train being The Mole and having plans to spread misinformation to the Boys, Homelander just straight up fires her from the Seven, and making it clear to her that he's being merciful for this. Putting aside his hypocrisy for the umpteenth time of how he would obviously not have taken it well and immediately killed A-Train if he found out, Homelander has now got rid of a valuable member who has the Super-Intelligence to make his plans come true out of unhinged egotism. Never mind the possibility that Sage would have a motive to get revenge on him at a later point.
Sugary Malice: Homelander is a master of making innocent-sounding comments incredibly threatening, to the point of doing it in almost every conversation he has with other characters.
Superheroes Wear Capes: Invoked with his costume. However, he's far from the hero people believe him to be.
Superior Successor:
As shown in Season 3, he's one to Soldier Boy, and this is by design. Both are Nigh Invulnerable, and during their fight, it's shown Homelander has a slight edge on raw strength compared to Soldier Boy. And that's leaving out his flight and laser vision.
Ryan appears to be one to Homelander himself, seemingly possessing superior laser vision, and, even as a child, he is able to knock Homelander down. Homelander even alludes to Ryan having the potential to be stronger than him when speaking to Maeve.
Superman Substitute: Played for Horror. His power set, color scheme, apparent patriotic image, and falsified American family paint him in a very unflattering depiction of this.
Superpower Lottery: As a Superman-knockoff, Homelander has pretty much all the abilities his role model is known for — flight, invulnerability, super strength, super senses (hearing, X-ray vision, etc.), super speed, and the ability to shoot laser beams with his eyes. The advantage of having so many powers is on full display in Season 3, when Soldier Boy (with super strength nearly rivaling Homelander's), Butcher (with similar levels of super strength and laser eyes almost as powerful as Homelander's), and Hughie (with teleportation abilities) were able to temporarily restrain Homelander, but he was able to escape using his flying abilities.
However, there turns out to be one drawback to Homelander's pool of superpowers: he still ages like a normal human. This is something that Soldier Boy, who Homelander is supposed to be superior to, has, and even lesser supes like Stormfront and Black Noir have. It seems, if nothing else, even Homelander is susceptible to dying of old age.
Super-Senses: He has super-hearing and super-smelling.
Super-Speed: He claims to have broken the sound barrier when he was eight years old. In adulthood, the Boys' devices recorded him as flying over 1,100 mph/492+ m/s while looking for Translucent. At the end of Season 1 he is able to extract Billy and Stillwell's son Teddy from her house in mere milliseconds after Butcher detonates the C4 strapped to Stillwell's chest.
Super-Strength: Homelander is not feared just for his Eye Beams, but also for his monstrous brutal strength. He finally shows how powerful his strikes can be while fighting Soldier Boy and Billy, who both are serious threats to him. Even then, when he was in the end overpowered by Soldier Boy, Butcher, and Hughie, it took all three to even hold Homelander down, and he was still able to break free and escape.
Super Supremacist: When he's exceptionally annoyed with Starlight over thinking she's actively helping Hughie and The Boys, he tells her that "we're a different breed" and that she shouldn't be helping "these mud people," which is some straight-up Nazi phrasing. It's little wonder that he hooks up with Stormfront, an actual Nazi. He decides to set a world where Supes are in charge instead of celebrities by Season 3.
Super-Toughness: He's unaffected by light machine gun fire, industrial explosions, blows from most lesser superhumans, and having a bus dropped on him. It's to the point that the main plot of Season 3 is The Boys trying to find some way to kill him before he enters a full-blown Villainous Breakdown and goes on a rampage. During his fight with Soldier Boy, Billy, and Hughie in Season 3, Homelander is able to shrug off physical blows from all three men (with the former two in particular likely only being marginally weaker than himself) and keep going, as well as take direct hits from Billy's Eye Beams (which were shown in a Beam-O-War to be comparable to Homelander's own) and be surprised rather than actually hurt. In the aftermath of the battle, the only harm he suffers is a minor bruise, though this is enough to leave him seething in rage. By comparison, Butcher had a bloody mouth from Homelander's blows and Soldier Boy suffered bloodshot eyes from being strangled for a bit.
Surrounded by Idiots: By Season 3, he's become fed up with how "fucking stupid" everyone around him is. In Season 4, it gets to the point where he gets fed up with all the ass-kissing from his teammates and decides to recruit Sister Sage into the Seven because he wants someone with actual brains who will tell him things the way they are. Of course, he completely ignores that everyone just agrees with him only because they fear for their lives.
A Taste of Their Own Medicine: He's spent his entire life as The Dreaded and a bully to most of everyone who's ever known his real personality. In Season 3, he ends up becoming terrified of Soldier Boy after the Herogasm fight.
Team Dad: Deconstructed, he sees himself as one but has a warped view of parenthood due to never having a father of his own. Since he was raised in a laboratory with scientists who saw him as nothing more than a lab rat, he has no idea of how to provide that form of guidance and affection. When he meets Ryan, he plans to raise him as his successor and puts him through dangerous situations in order to push him into activating his powers.
The Teetotaler: He doesn't drink or do drugs and is vocal about it.
Then Let Me Be Evil:
As shown in The Boys: Diabolical, Homelander started out wanting to be a genuine hero, but his recklessness, inexperience, and deep-seated trauma ended up causing more harm than good, culminating in him blindly murdering a group of terrorists and several hostages in a dissociative fit of rage after they began deriding him as a monster. This, coupled with Black Noir helping him cover up his mistakes, is what instilled in him his mindset that he can do whatever he wants without giving a damn about the consequences so long as his reputation is still intact.
In the series proper, Homelander gradually goes from wanting to be universally beloved and viewed as an all-loving paragon, to perceiving his hunger for love as a weakness and confidently proclaiming his willingness to raze the entire world should he lose his good publicity. By the third and fourth seasons, he has no issue appealing exclusively to radical right-wing groups, expresses his Super Supremacist leanings like a badge of honor, and is less interested overall in playing The Cape.
They Know Too Much: At the end of Season 4, Homelander orders Ashley to compile a list of everyone at Vought who knows sensitive or compromising information about him. His intent is clear: anyone who knows too much could potentially be used against him, so he plans to eliminate them before they ever get the chance to expose him.
Token Evil Teammate: Played with. While the Seven do "good" as a matter of course and do save a lot of people, they are still managed by a shady corporation with extremely suspect motives, thus making them an "evil" force. However, even on a team of incredibly flawed, selfish, and morally questionable characters, Homelander is unquestionably the worst of the lot, and his teammates are often shown to be outright fearful of him due to his sadism and unpredictability.
Token Flyer: Homelander is shown to be the only Supe capable of flight in the Seven, and nobody else was shown being capable of flight in the show (aside from some unnamed background supes). There is Stormfront, but her's is a case of Not Quite Flight and she cannot freely levitate like Homelander. The others who could fly and levitate are Nubian Prince and Nubia, shown in Episode 6 of The Boys: Diabolical, which is considered canon, but they don't appear at all in the main show. In the Season 3 finale, Ryan has finally inherited this ability from him. Starlight also learned to fly as of Season 4, Golden Boy from Gen V has a similar ability, and the second Black Noir tells the Deep that he is frustrated that he isn't allowed to fly.
Tom the Dark Lord: An alternate take on his 'human' name is that it was chosen for sounding extremely ordinary. John has been used by many famed and powerful figures throughout history, but it's also a very common name, signifying how Vought and their scientists never viewed Homelander as anything more than a project and just gave him a simple moniker as an afterthought. It's to the point where he has no surname. It also may give him extra Everyman cred with the public.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Incredibly, considering how much of a jerkass he already was from the start. In Season 1 he had a massive ego and was indifferent to the common man as anything other than a source of admiration for him to bask in, but he mostly kept a lid on his worst traits, mainly expressing them around people who already knew or wouldn't survive the next few minutes. Come Season 3 where between losing both his son and Stormfront, being forcibly humbled by Stan Edgar, and publicly eating crow for a year amid his floundering popularity, he's been pushed to the brink. As a result, his charismatic veneer is barely holding together and he'll cruelly demean just about anyone with little to no cause, which can escalate to physical intimidation frighteningly quickly if even the slightest disrespect is shown, or even implied to him.
Trademark Favorite Food: Has a real thing for milk. He's obsessed with Stillwell's breast milk and is seen sipping cow milk in several other scenes.
Tragic Villain: A remorseless and hateable sociopath who needs to die he definitely is, but ultimately he never had a chance to be anything else. He was treated like a science experiment throughout his formative years, without love or human contact (which was revealed to have been deliberate to make him emotionally dependent on Vought's PR) and painfully experimented on to find his limits. "One Plus One" further shows that Homelander genuinely wanted to be a hero at the start of his career, but his mental instability, the abuse he suffered and Vought's influence made him unfit for heroic duties and eventually corrupted him into a monster. It's even implied by the possibility of his Split Personality there are parts of him that want to stop but stronger parts that won't let him, the latter of which came from his horrific childhood.
Tranquil Fury: By Season 3, he seems to always be this when nothing goes his way. Homelander rarely stops smiling or raises his voice, but there's obvious rage and malice that oozes from his smile and every syllable.
Trauma Button: His Security Blanket. Someone moving it around without his permission sets him off and makes him remember the "bad room".
Troll: Homelander does have a sense of humor, and a very screwed, scary one.
Leaves Maeve behind and flies into the building while knowing that she can't fly, waits for her, and only after proceeds to stop the attackers, and by that we mean punching a hole through their stomach and using Maeve as a bait to make it look the terrorists attacked first and they had no choice but to kill them.
Declares on TV, in front of the entire world that Maeve is a lesbian while knowing she is bisexual and gives her ridiculous lines to say in the Dawn of the Seven movie about being queer. Even Maeve asks him how long is he gonna torture her.
Has a habit of sweet talking to the Deep, then giving him a Death Glare, while watching him mumbling about how sorry he is for screwing the things. In Season 3, he invites the Deep to a dinner and the menu he chooses is with sea animals. Then Homelander forces The Deep to eat Timothy the octopus if he wants to return to the Seven.
And how could he ever forget about Starlight? In Season 3, his idea of celebrating his birthday is to bring the Deep back and have her perform Happy Birthday to him, in a bikini for the entire world to see. Several days later, he declares Starlight is his girlfriend out of thin air during the American Hero TV show.
Troubled Abuser: For most of the first seasons, Homelander is shown being a highly frustrated sociopath, who, in his desperation to be loved and adored, is shown murdering people innocents and guilty alike, threatens everybody around him, rapes Becca Butcher, and bullies his teammates all the time. He also has a history of emotional and physical abuse at the hands of Vought's scientists and Madelyn Stillwell, who heavily experimented on him or groomed him in the case of the latter, without carrying about the psychological ramifications that can have for a child with superpowers. All of this abuse culminated in Homelander becoming an unredeemable monster who mercilessly abuses other people and is an existential threat to humanity.
Trumplica: Homelander is a blond-haired conservative icon and pathological malignant narcissist who wraps himself in patriotic imagery while privately only caring about himself. He regularly attacks any media which is insufficiently worshipful of him. He demands unconditional loyalty from his supporters while offering no loyalty in return. He has a bottomless need for the love and adulation of his masses of followers even though he regards those same followers as rubes to be manipulated and exploited. He pays public lip service to religion and traditional values while showing no interest in those things in his private life. He has a variety of politically incorrect views and eagerly embraces the role of the Angry White Man, but is uncomfortable with outright Nazism except insofar as Nazis give him a narcissistic supply. By Season 3, it could hardly be more obvious, with Homelander holding rallies and a QAnon Shaman lookalike being spotted among his supporters. He also quotes many of Trump's famous quotes verbatim and the writers themselves have commented that his Season 3 arc is primarily meant as a Take That! towards him.
Tyrant Takes the Helm:
Season 3 sees him take control of Vought, making up for his lack of proper business acumen by being absolutely intimidating and reducing everyone around him to terrified sycophants.
The end of Season 4 takes things another level — he manages to become the de facto leader of the United States, with Calhoun acting as his Puppet King.
Übermensch: As far as Homelander is concerned, he is the master race, and nobody else can be what he is. He made his point very clear to Stormfront. He even manages to become the unofficial de facto ruler of the United States of America at the end of Season 4, despite causing many setbacks that would've caused his plans to fail.
Uncanny Valley: There is something distinctly off-putting and unnatural about Homelander, especially when he smiles. On paper, he's got the perfect, blinding white smile that any celebrity of his caliber would have, but his eyes are just devoid of any genuine emotion.
The Unfought:
For the most part, none of the protagonists ever get into a fight against Homelander, which makes perfect sense as if he did enter combat, Homelander could simply kill The Boys off without any effort. Rather than directly fight him, The Boys opt to outmaneuver Homelander in their goals and, if given the opportunity, take advantage of his psychological and emotional issues.
This is finally averted in Herogasm: with the help of Soldier Boy and V24, Butcher and Hughie finally confront Homelander physically and give him the fight of his life - while he retains some raw strength advantage over them, they're able to use numbers and teamwork to the point that they pin him down and almost finish him off with Soldier Boy's depowering beam, although he manages to escape at the last moment.
"The Instant White-Hot Wild" similarly has Queen Maeve — after spending the entire series up to that point being bullied and abused by Homelander — finally engage him in a physical confrontation, and surprisingly manage to make him bleed. Twice.
Ungrateful Bastard: This man has little to no respect for anyone who does things for him, despite how good of a job they do or how much he needs their help. For just two examples, he constantly mistreats Ashley when she bends over backwards to help him manage the company, and even makes her role as the CEO entirely ceremonial save for becoming little more than a go-fer; he also treats Firecracker like garbage and tells her to move when she starts to cough in his vicinity - despite the reason for her coughing fits being medication she's taking to produce breast milk for him.
Unholy Matrimony: He starts a relationship with Stormfront in "We Gotta Go Now." Given that he is a bloodthirsty, deranged, and cruel narcissist and she is a literal Nazi, this does not make for a healthy pairing.
Unreliable Expositor: His Post-Rape Taunt is contradicted by his complete lack of sexual stamina. His blatant sadism makes it likely he was making it up just to hurt Billy as much as possible.
Unskilled, but Strong:
Homelander shows few combat skills, mostly because he is so powerful that he has never been challenged in a fight. As a result, he tends to carelessly use his Heat Vision against opponents, which often causes significant collateral damage. This is later downplayed in his Super Hero Origin where it's shown in his flashbacks that he did have actual combat training as a child. He's just too lazy to use any of it. Even when he does use them though, they appear to be pretty basic fighting techniques.
In "Herogasm", we finally see Homelander have an actual fight against Soldier Boy, Butcher, and Hughie. While he is clearly less skilled in hand-to-hand combat than Soldier Boy and Butcher, who were both experienced fighters before gaining powers, Homelander is still marginally stronger than both of them and equips himself surprisingly well. But the show makes clear that without his superior strength, Homelander would have easily lost against Soldier Boy; Despite his training, he has no actual experience fighting an opponent of equal or similar physical abilities, which forces him to flee when he fears that, three-on-one, he may actually lose to them.
In the finale, Queen Maeve is able to put him on the ropes during their fight due to her superior combat skills. She even manages to give him a nosebleed and puncture his left eardrum with a steel rod. However he was holding back, and he still managed to block, evade, and counter some of her attacks.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom:
In a rare example of self-infliction, it's his fault for Stormfront's suicide and his resulting Villainous Breakdown. While visiting her, he carelessly and thoughtlessly rejects the notion of leading an Aryan master race since he sees himself as the master race and leaves in a huff despite her silently pleading for him to come back. Then the next time he visits, he makes it all about himself again with no effort to apologize by talking about how it's his birthday and being insensitive about her inability to respond. Stormfront, who despite her crippling injuries was likely keeping herself going with the hopes of the both of them ruling together, probably felt that she had nothing left to live for with him rejecting her views, leading to her deciding to kill herself.
As revealed in Gen V, his decision not to save anyone on Flight 37 leads to the deaths of Indira Shetty's husband and daughter, prompting her to seek revenge by creating a virus designed to wipe out Supes.
Upbringing Makes the Hero:
When Homelander goes to visit Vogelbaum to talk about his childhood, Vogelbaum admits that he was his biggest failed project. Vogelbaum explains that had he allowed Homelander to be raised in a home with a loving family, rather than isolated in a laboratory, he would have grown up with a sense of morality and empathy, rather than The Sociopath he is today.
When he finds out that Rebecca Butcher conceived their son, and they are both very much alive, it's heavily implied that by being raised in a stable home, Vought International is grooming the boy to become the All-Loving Hero his biological father can't be.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: Vogelbaum describes him as "quite sweet" when he was five or six, even cuddling up to the doctor for old folk hero stories. His Origins Episode in The Boys: Diabolical reveals that this personality actually carried into his adult years, as he began his stint as a superhero genuinely wanting to help people. Unfortunately, his disastrous first mission and Black Noir absolving him of all responsibility would end up twisting him into a megalomaniacal monster.
Victory Is Boring: He confesses in Season 4 to Sister Sage that despite working his entire life to climb to the peak of Vought and finally achieving everything he wanted, he is still not happy.
Villain Has a Point:
While his abandonment of the passenger plane is cold-blooded and it is partly his fault that it is crashing, note  he makes logical points to Maeve as to why he can't simply save it like you'd expect Superman to do, as there is no time to get everyone off, and trying to manhandle the plane would send it head over heels or tear it apart. It doesn't justify refusing to save the few people that he could have plausibly gotten out, though. He also failed to realize that he could've subdued the terrorist in the cockpit without destroying the control panel. He also could've asked anyone in the crew if they were capable of flying the plane, and could even have quickly flown out and brought in someone who could. More likely though, he simply didn't care to try.
While Homelander's hostile takeover of Vought in Season 3 was little more than an ill-advised act of megalomania, his negative sentiment towards Vought and reasoning for the coup is understandable. Considering how Vought mistreated Homelander during his formative years, the higher-ups' manipulations of him as an adult and the way they were raising his son, it's easy to see why he is done playing games. Also, there is the fact that, despite all of Stan Edgar's claims, Vought is for all intents and purposes a superhero company, with pretty much most if not almost all their bottom line and prestige being dependent on the Seven and other supes.
Homelander murdering all the scientists in the lab he was created in was horrifying, but everyone who was involved in his "upbringing" brought it on themselves. Most of them laughed at his humiliation, tortured him without care, or sexually abused him when he was too young to do anything about it. When he comes back as an adult and takes his revenge on all of them, it's hard to pity them.
Villainous Breakdown: Happens on a semi-regular basis given Homelander's Sanity Slippage.
Homelander spends most of Season 2 in a metaphorical pot of water slowly heating up until it's ready to boil and spill over the edge, as everything he holds dear begins slipping out of his grasp. Edgar takes back control over the corporate aspect of Vought and relegates him to mascot position, his son openly rejects him as his father after he goes too far in his abuse, and Stormfront begins stealing his leadership of the Seven and his popularity with the masses. It culminates in him killing Doppelganger for taking his form and declaring he doesn't need anyone.
He has a long drawn-out one in the Season 2 finale. Upon learning Vought conspired with Butcher to kidnap his son, Ryan, he massacres the Vought assault team sent to abduct him in a rage. When he subsequently discovers to his horror that Ryan has immolated his lover, Stormfront, he swallows his fury long enough to beckon his son to return with him only to watch the boy walk over to his nemesis, Billy Butcher. Faced with this explicit sign of rejection, Homelander's composure shatters as he contorts his face into a sob then laughs maniacally. Declaring Ryan to be "his" regardless, he moves to reclaim him by force before Maeve halts his rampage by blackmailing him with footage from the Flight 37 incident. Forced to choose between his son and remaining a national icon, Homelander reluctantly lets Butcher go. Later on in the night, he is seen furiously masturbating on top of a building, madly proclaiming that he can do "whatever the fuck I want".
Homelander's infamous monologue during the Starlight House donation announcement. When Starlight says that "Homelander is human like everyone else" and "Homelander makes mistakes too" Homelander launches into a huge rant about how he's better than everyone else, how everyone needs him to save them, and how he's the "real hero".
Villainous Crush: Has an unhealthy obsession with Queen Maeve.
Villainous Friendship:
With Black Noir. While part of this is the two wanting allies in each other, there are hints that Homelander sincerely likes and sees Black Noir as a friend. He regularly praises Noir as the most competent member of the Seven. Notably, even though Homelander hates "cripples", he shows no frustration or impatience with Noir's muteness. He's genuinely devastated when he learns that Black Noir has abandoned him after discovering that Soldier Boy is back, and breaks down crying when he confronts and kills Noir for hiding the truth of Homelander's parentage. He selected the second Black Noir based on the physical resemblance with the original one.
He strikes a friendship with Sister Sage in Season 4. She has the honor of being the only supe praised for their intelligence and one of the very few people Homelander truly respects. He makes her his second in command as he promised, and they work quite well together to create unrest among Starlight's followers. Of course, he is still not above humiliating her if he feels overshadowed by Sage. He kicks her out of the Seven when he learns she hid that A-Train was the leak. She still stays loyal to him, which shocks Homelander when he learns she kept working on their goal to take over America.
Villain Protagonist: Despite being the main villain and antagonist, Homelander has his own separate Myth Arc and supporting characters, sizeable screen time, and his story often contrasts with other main characters like Butcher, Hughie, and Annie.
Villain Respect: He has a long-standing one for Butcher, but begins to gain one for Hughie in a certain sense as well. In both cases, it doesn't come from a physical factor, but an emotional fascination:
For Butcher: When Homelander and Butcher finally confront each other face to face, Homelander is both intrigued and impressed that (unlike literally everyone else in the series) Butcher isn't afraid of him, and in fact shows his unmeasurable hate in all its fury towards the most powerful being on the planet. A perfect example occurs in Season 3. Homelander has a habit of breaking into people's houses and living spaces in order to threaten them. Yet when he goes to visit Butcher, he politely asks to come in before engaging in a genuine conversation with him, showing an odd level of restraint for his nemesis. He believes that he and Butcher are one and the same, being a couple of angry, violent, and mentally disturbed men with dark pasts, used as puppets by higher authorities.
For Hughie: While he initially treats Hughie as nothing more than an annoyance who follows Butcher's every command and happens to be dating one of Homelander's teammates, the fact that Hughie is so beloved by people despite being a normal human perplexes Homelander, who, at his core, just wants to be adored. This confusion eventually twists into a mix of fascination, respect, and jealous hatred, as the people who hate Homelander (namely Butcher and Annie) love Hughie more, and Homelander can't understand why, not understanding that Hughie's kind heart naturally draws people to care about him because he cares right back. Hughie has to spell it out for him in Season 5 when Homelander outright asks why people love him so much, and his explanation leaves Homelander at a loss for words.
Villain with Good Publicity: Zig Zagged. In Season 1, he is a widely beloved, publicly-worshipped paragon of truth, justice, and the American Way, not unlike his distinguished inspiration, while being a complete monster behind the scenes. In Season 2, however, his very conservative presentation, eagerness to get involved in the military industrial complex, and brutal methods cause him to suffer severe backlash from anti-war and liberal groups. By the end of Season 3 while he's tarnished his reputation with the majority of the public, he has grown an increasingly large and loyal following on the far right that sees nothing wrong with him murdering a man in broad daylight.
Virtuous Character Copy: Downplayed. Starr has compared Homelander to Joffrey Baratheon from A Song of Ice and Fire and Game of Thrones respectively, as both are spoiled blonde-haired brats desperate for approval from powerful empires, but Homelander is a more "likable" version of Joffery since he has more sympathetic traits than the prince.
Visionary Villain: He evolves into this role by Season 4. Now that he has finally reached his goal, all that is left for Homelander is to install himself and the Supes as the "wrathful gods" of this world ruled by insects. He presents his goal as being Well Intentioned Extremism in his speech to his team, stating that they intend to save the world for their children and declare war on the world. He seems to be wanting to build an army of Supes and take over the world.
Wanting Is Better Than Having: Despite having desired unconditional love for the longest time, he realizes in Season 4, how unfulfilling it is having Loony Fan's who'll cheer for him no matter what he does, even killing someone in public.
Wearing a Flag on Your Head: His cape is this. It was initially supposed to be just red, but he even insisted it would be this.
We Can Rule Together:
He tries to encourage his father, Soldier Boy to join him and get revenge on Vought and the world for how they treated them. It doesn't work.
Sage refuses at first to join the Seven when Homelander invites her, but he easily enters under her skin once he mentions that she could put all her theories to practice on a global scale instead of wasting away alone in her apartment. Homelander keeps his promise and makes her his right hand.
"Well Done, Son" Guy:
Most of his actions in Season 1 including the creation of Super villains were done to help Stillwell and earn her approval. It ends once he gets fed up with her lying and kills her.
He has shades of this during his final confrontation with his father, Soldier Boy, in the Season 3 finale. He's all but begging for Soldier Boy to join him and be his father. Unfortunately, his hyper-masculine father rejects him for crying before trying to kill him. Even after seeing Soldier Boy's contempt of him, when Homelander discovers Soldier Boy's cryogenically preserved body, he's visibly holding back tears, implying that part of him is still craving for his biologocial father's validation.
Thanks to Vought using their finest psychologists to instill a hunger for love and approval within him, Homelander allowed scientists to subject him to horrific experiments and tortures when he could have walked out anytime, but he couldn't stomach the notion his parental figures would be disappointed in him should he do so.
What Beautiful Eyes!: The first thing Stormfront notices about Homelander is his intense blue eyes (probably because, along with his blond hair, they fit into her ideal of an Aryan).
What Is This Thing You Call "Love"?: The ultimate crux of Homelander's Love Hungry and I Just Want to Be Loved flaws. As a result of being Raised in a Lab, suffering from cruel, torturous experimentation in his formative years, and then experiencing nothing but the pleasures of doing "whatever the fuck he wants" as a superhero adored by the mass population for 20+ years while having a MegaCorp absolve him of any consequences of his actions, Homelander's view of "love" is justifiably very skewed and self-serving in an All Take and No Give way. In addition, since pretty much everyone is either manipulating him, scared of him, blindly worshipping him, or outright hating his guts to truly teach him about love (with the very few people who actually care for him being counted on one hand before eventually becoming turned away by Homelander's Ax-Crazy behavior), along with his narcissism and ego preventing him from truly opening up about his insecurities and leaving him with a pathological inability to owe up to his mistakes to better himself, it causes a Vicious Cycle where his attempts at gaining "love" (i.e. narcissistic supply) only end up in fatal disaster for others, either have them running away out of self-preservation fear or becoming enemies who'll stop at nothing of wanting him fucking dead.
White Male Lead: Homelander's looks and position are used as a plot device in the show. He is the Villain Protagonist in a fairly diverse cast, and a blue-eyed blond man leading the most powerful, if dysfunctional, team of super-beings on the planet. In Season 2, Stormfront got interested in him for his Aryan looks and planned to make him the leader of an army of "Aryan ubermensch to their victory".
With Great Power Comes Great Insanity: After hallucinating Madelyn Stillwell, who tells him he deserves more love and praise than even Jesus, it becomes clear his god complex is spiraling out of control. Already unstable, and violent, his thoughts turn darker, as he begins to rationalize atrocities such as ripping out babies from their mothers' womb.
Woobie, Destroyer of Worlds: Raised in a lab? Check. Denied affection and normal human contact from birth? Check. Develops into a homicidal maniac with no proper emotional development? Check.
The Worf Effect: On the receiving end of this during Season 3. Soldier Boy, Butcher, and Hughie manage to almost depower and kill him and give him his first bruise at Herogasm. Soldier Boy later grabs Homelander by the face in the finale, and he's shown struggling to break his grip. Maeve also manages to make him bleed for the first time.
Worlds Most Sexy Woman: Gender inverted example. In Season 4, during a scene where potential new members for The Seven are being considered, a candidate named Hyperion is described as the world's second sexiest supe, right behind Homelander, making him the sexiest supe in the world.
World's Strongest Man: He's the greatest superhero in the world, and has a reputation for being unkillable. Madelyn Stillwell states "there isn't a weapon on Earth they haven't thrown at him that's worked". Whether this includes nuclear weapons or any kind of WMD isn't outright mentioned. It takes three Supes around his level to force him into retreat. By Season 4, Sameer mentions that for the Supe-killing virus to affect Homelander, it has to be potent enough to cause a pandemic that would kill everyone with Compound V in their systems and with the possibility that the virus would eventually mutate into something that can affect baseline humans as well. Gen V justifies Homelander's status as the world's strongest man upon The Reveal that his birth was part of Project Odessa to create God-tier Supes.
Worthy Opponent:
Homelander comes to see Butcher as this, where Butcher ends up as one of the few people to earn Homelander's respect. Initially, he was intrigued by Butcher, as the only civilian to hate him entirely and not fear him at all. By Season 3, Homelander and Butcher tolerate each other, with them sharing their hatred of being told what to do, and Homelander expressing disappointment for bringing Soldier Boy into their battle to the death. By Season 4, Homelander talks to him like he would a friend, being nothing but polite and treating him like a kindred spirit, despite still being enemies who intend to murder one another. In Season 5, he even outright tells Butcher that he's the only person who's ever challenged him and that there's a part of him that will miss him when he dies.
Homelander also repeatedly singles out Hughie, mentioning him several times as someone he's particularly excited to murder.
Would Hit a Girl: Has no issue with physically threatening to kill Starlight once he starts to realize that she was working covertly with The Boys. Prior to this, he killed Madelyn for lying to him and raped Becca.
Would Hurt a Child: Homelander is perfectly willing to let a child die to achieve his objectives, and personally murders a child when he shoots down a plane. This is in sharp contrast to Billy, who is noticeably more gentle with children. He has no qualms physically and psychologically threatening his own son just to get him to activate his super powers.
Wrong Context Magic: No supe in the world is like Homelander. Not only is he head-and-shoulders above pretty much everyone else both in terms of sheer power and range of abilities, he is a Token Flyer in a world of mostly non-flying superhumans, and is the only superhero that can sire naturally "super-abled" children as shown with Ryan (all other supes are either infertile or can only have non-supe children, later injections of V notwithstanding). It's implied that being the biological son of Soldier Boy, the Super Prototype of all superheroes, may have something to do with it. Gen V reveals that Homelander's birth was part of Project Odessa to create God-tier Supes, which would explain why he's so much more powerful than the average Supe.
X-Ray Vision: He can see through everything except zinc.
You're Not My Father: He's on the receiving end of the trope by Ryan on two occasions. The first time was when he tried to teach his son how to fly by pushing him out of a roof and the second time was when he comes across Becca's corpse and Stormfront's incapacitated body and urging Ryan to come with him, only to end with Homelander's son staying with Butcher instead, much to his dismay.
You Are What You Hate: Regular humans disgust him, and he refers to them as "mud people" or "toys for [his] amusement." However, as his conversation with himself in the mirror reveals, Homelander hates humans so much because he knows there's a part of him deep down that is still just like them, no matter what he does to get rid of it. Homelander projects all the things he secretly loathes about himself onto them, and is envious that they can form the connections he craves but doesn't have the maturity or inner strength to admit he does. So he always starts the cycle over again, each time growing increasingly more violent and deranged.
You Should Have Died Instead: Homelander reacts to seeing Soldier Boy in a body bag with visible devastation. When The Deep tries to explain, Homelander turns to him, eyes glowing, and coldly says it should’ve been him instead.The threat is enough to make Deep wet himself out of fear, which he awkwardly tries to pass off as having just come from swimming.