Absurdly Sharp Claws: She has ones sharp enough to cut through Black Noir's seemingly armored suit.
Achilles' Heel: While it's not enough to kill her, any damage Kimiko takes to her head such as a Boom, Headshot! will knock her out cold for several seconds.
Action Girl: As a Supe, she’s the muscle of the group and with her regenerative abilities, above-average strength, and claws, she’s difficult to take out.
Affectionate Nickname: Frenchie calls her mon cœurnote.
Agony of the Feet: Black Noir stabs her in the foot to pin her down.
Alternate Company Equivalent: Her past as a Tyke-Bomb trained only to kill which cost her her ability to speak, relative lack of social skills but possessing a child-like adorable personality makes her essentially The Boys take on Cassandra Cain. That being said, Cass has an even bigger Thou Shalt Not Kill rule than Batman, while Kimiko most certainly does not.
Badass Adorable: She has a childlike personality and is extremely shy; she's also one of the most vicious members of the team.
Because You Were Nice to Me:
She's a danger to everyone except Frenchie, who is implied to be the first person to treat her with kindness. After she flees and Frenchie gets attacked by Black Noir in an alley, Kimiko intervenes and saves his life.
Despite her distrust towards Vought-aligned supes, she's also thankful to Starlight for helping to save her life in the Season 1 finale, even though Kimiko was knocked out from drugs. When they meet again, she hugs Annie and smiles while holding hands.
Beware the Nice Ones: Despite her personal traumas, Kimiko is, by and large, one of the sweetest members of the group once she recovers her sanity. That said, she's also immensely more powerful than all of them (besides Annie), and isn't afraid to literally tear people apart if she needs to.
Beware the Quiet Ones: She never speaks and is petite in stature, but she’s actually the most dangerous member of the Boys. Although Starlight is probably more powerful, Kimiko is far more brutal and skilled in terms of hand-to-hand combat. She’s strong enough to dismember a room full of trained soldiers. Even without powers, she’s able to kill Nina’s gang almost by herself.
The Big Girl: Kimiko is the team's main bruiser who's able to shrug off lethal wounds and engage in fights with Supes.
Big "NO!": Season 4 ends with The Boys being rounded up as they attempt to go off the grid. Distraught by the sight of Frenchie being led into a van while under Cate's mind control, she regains use of her voice to scream in anguish.
Big Ol' Eyebrows: Her eyebrows are very thick.
Big Sister Instinct: Kimiko is the older sister of her brother Kenji, which means she felt duty-bound to protect him. This makes it even worse when he's murdered with her being unable to stop his attacker.
Brought Down to Badass: Even after Soldier Boy depowers her, Kimiko is still a force to be reckoned with as seen in her survival battle against Nina's enforcers.
Brutal Honesty: Once she begins speaking in Season 5, she hasn't gotten a handle on social niceties yet, her first words to Annie after hugging her is telling her she's so greasy it felt like hugging a McRib. Later, when the Worm talks to her, she tells him that his voice makes her want to kill herself.
Can't Stay Normal: After being abducted by Little Nina's goons, finding out Frenchie was tortured by them and almost being killed, she decides to ask Annie to get her some Compound V so she can get her powers back and protect Frenchie.
Comic-Book Movies Don't Use Codenames: She's only called The Female in her first few appearances. After Mesmer reads her mind, everyone calls her Kimiko.
Cute Bruiser: For most of the series, she's by far the strongest and most lethal member of The Boys in a one-on-one fight, subjecting plenty of enemies to a Mook Horror Show. Despite that, she's also a sweet-natured young woman played by the petite, beautiful Karen Fukahara.
Cute Mute: Kimiko's deadly, yet cute as a button, and hasn't said a word since the start of her dark and troubled existence.
Dark and Troubled Past: Along with her brother, she was a Child Soldier, kidnapped by a terrorist organisation called the Shining Light Liberation Army... Then she was pumped full of experimental drugs against her will in order to become a super terrorist.
The real reason Kimiko became mute ultimately wasn’t just the Shining Light killing hers and Kenji’s parents— it was the accumulated trauma and shame from her brutal, often-one-sided spars against other young girls that rendered her unable to speak even after she was given consent to.
Death Glare: Her default expression when things get dangerous, especially back when the Boys first met her. When watching the news about Stormfront being hailed as a hero, she looks angrily at the TV for her killing Kenji.
Disabled in the Adaptation: In the comics, The Female is selectively mute and just chooses not to talk. Kimiko genuinely can't speak despite her attempts and instead communicates through sign language. This is because she was forced to stay silent and denied her right to speak during her time with Shining Light and when they finally allowed her to, she had gone so long without talking that she couldn't bring herself to. Seeing Frenchie, the man she loves, be abducted in the finale not long after they became a couple causes her to break her mutism and scream in anguish.
Disney Death: It looks like Black Noir killed her in the alley but then Frenchie witnesses her Healing Factor kicking in.
The Dreaded: When the Boys first find Kimiko, she's being held prisoner by armed human traffickers in solitary confinement. She kills everyone in the room when they let her loose, the Boys are then forced to lock themselves into the cell they had just released her from to survive, and the last of her captors immediately shoots himself after seeing she had escaped her cell.
Fights Like a Normal: Her superpowers aren't really associated with any new abilities (unlike most of the other Supes we've seen on the show) - she can just heal better, hit harder, and run faster than a normal person. This reflects in her fighting style, which is basically what Butcher does when he fights, but better.
Good Thing You Can Heal: Kimiko gets brutally dismembered and ripped apart often to make use of her super Healing Factor. Luckily she doesn't seem to mind too much.
Gutted Like a Fish: Black Noir cuts her entire torso open, which only disables her for at most a few minutes before her Healing Factor kicks in.
Handicapped Badass: Mute, but also the only Supe out of The Boys.
Hand Signals: In Season 2, she speaks to her brother Kenji using sign language they invented after she became mute as a result of her trauma and later teaches Frenchie to understand what she's saying with gestures.
Healing Factor:
Kimiko turns out to have one, as shown in the wake of her fight with Black Noir after he stabbed and slashed her multiple times. A-Train also finds out the hard way that he can't kill her, smashing her head at super speed to no avail. However, tranquilizers can disable her.
Stormfront snaps her neck in "What I Know", which barely slows her down. By Season 4, she can regrow dismembered limbs and even quickly heals being splatted from a high fall without complaint.
Tala ambushes her with a point-blank shot to the chest that blasts her body apart (to the point of spilling out her guts); by the time Hughie comes back from his own fight to help her, she’s mostly pieced herself back together and fully heals in time to take her opponent on.
Heroic Sacrifice: She gets gutted holding off Black Noir from coming after Frenchie. Though she quickly heals from it.
Hidden Depths:
Once she's mellowed out, she's capable of following instructions like a valid part of the team, whether it's the exact method of beating batter in making French pastries to acting as Hughie's backup and breaking A-Train's leg with a pipe at the right time.
She also invented a whole new sign language with her brother after she lost her ability to talk.
She loves musicals and likes to imagine herself singing and dancing as if she were in one.
Horrifying the Horror: After she breaks free and starts attacking Nina’s gang of criminals, Nina runs away in shock and fear.
I Am a Monster: When talking with her brother, she says she was turned into this by the Shining Light. Her brother points out that if she became a monster, so did he. It's given more focus in Season 3, between her own powers and her instilled capacity for violence even without them.
I Am Not a Gun: She "tells" Billy this after he informs her he's sold her services to Little Nina for an assassination in exchange for information.
Kimiko: (Through text on her phone) I'm not your fucking gun.
Butcher: That is exactly what you are.
I Just Want to Be Normal: For Kimiko, her powers are a sad reminder of her lost childhood. When Soldier Boy depowers her by accident, she is ecstatic to learn she no longer has her powers, considering them more of a curse that ruined her entire life.
Immune to Bullets: Downplayed. She's not bulletproof at all, but given her Healing Factor bullets can only slow her down. Shoot her in the head and she'll get back up in under a minute.
I Need a Freaking Drink: After attending TruthCon and seeing a child trafficking photo that was falsely appropriated for a political agenda, Kimiko gets triggered enough to drink several cans of beer just to relax. Then her regenerative powers kick in and the inebriation wears off, causing her to get in a scuffle with the conspiracy nut who used that image.
Insecure Love Interest: She confesses that part of the reason she pushed Frenchie to be with Colin is because she thought French deserved better than her. Then Frenchie assures her that nothing is.
Interchangeable Asian Cultures: While the first season doesn't give her a clear origin, suggesting she comes from a fictitious country in southeast Asia that is a hodgepodge of Japanese and Chinese cultures, it's ultimately averted in season 2 with her being explicitly stated as being Japanese. The Shining Light murdered her parents and kidnapped her brother and her to the Philippines to indoctrinate them as soldiers. However, Kimiko didn't know where she had been taken, and so could only give vague answers as to where they were from.
Firecracker: Oh I'm gonna send your ass back to China, bitch!
MM: She's Japanese.
Iron Butt-Monkey: Kimiko's body can take some of the worst punishments in the show, and she is among most constantly wounded characters. Some of the worst things she endured and survived are getting ripped apart by Black Noir, temporarily being depowered by Soldier Boy and ending up in the hospital, having her arm ripped off by Zoey and falling several floors.
It's Personal: She regards Stormfront as her Arch-Nemesis after she kills Kimiko's brother.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: In Season 4, upon seeing Frenchie is interested in Colin, she encourages him to be with Colin and be happy.
Jerkass to One: She's friendly and on good terms with all of the Boys… except for Butcher, whom she often disobeys or comes into conflict with. However, given how Butcher treats her, it's arguably justified.
Just Friends: Frenchie and Kimiko are just friends. In Season 2 he does kiss her while high but Kimiko immediately rejects him and Frenchie is remorseful for having crossed her boundaries. But in Season 3, Kimiko is the one kissing Frenchie, blurring the lines. For added points, the kiss comes after a fantasy she has about singing and dancing with him and repeatedly calling him "my man". In season 4, she tells Frenchie frankly that she loves him, but that the two of them can't be together. Until it actually does happen and they become more than friends at last.
Living MacGuffin: She's living proof of Vought's schemes, so both sides wanted to capture her very badly in Season 1.
Made of Iron: Even leaving aside her Healing Factor, she can tank attacks that would reduce a normal person to Ludicrous Gibs without so much as a bruise.
Morality Pet: Frenchie views her as this, claiming that she makes him a better person.
Motor Mouth: When she finally starts talking in Season 5, it turns out she has a lot to say, usually very rapidly and without much of a filter.
Named by the Adaptation: Kimiko Miyashiro. In the comics, she was known only as The Female (of the Species).
Neck Snap: Inflicted on her by Stormfront in the Season 2 finale. It literally only puts her down for a few seconds, and she simply re-snaps it into place before getting back up.
Nice Girl: As she gets more and more comfortable with the rest of the group, she blossoms into a woman who cares deeply about her friends and innocents. She's still incredibly dangerous, but only to Vought and Shining Light.
Nightmare Fuel Station Attendant: Kimiko's kindness and adorable personality are often juxtaposed with her horrifically violent fighting style and (somewhat) nonchalant attitude towards killing.
Kimiko: (texting) The therapist was right. I need to face my past. So I'm going to kill them all.
No Social Skills: Becomes quite chatty in Season 5, but has basically no filter, telling The Worm at one point that his voice makes her want to kill herself and suggesting killing Butcher to prevent the virus from spreading.
Omniglot: She understands Japanese (being from Japan), English (as she lived in the Philippines and currently lives in America), and sign language (which she uses to communicate outwardly when she needs to).
Pay Evil unto Evil: She's strong enough to kill humans in one hit, but noticeably goes out of her way to make her enemies' deaths as painful as possible. In the first two seasons it can be summed as her being in an understandably bad mood. She eases up a bit afterwards.
Platonic Life-Partners: She and Frenchie settle into this dynamic by the latter half of S2. Before this, the two have a short fight when following Kenji's death, Kimiko refuses to open up, rebuffs his romantic advancements, and becomes a Professional Killer for a while. Frenchie later apologizes for trying to force her into the role of his Living Emotional Crutch and the two end the season living together.
No longer platonic as of the Season 4 finale.
Promoted to Love Interest: In the comics she and Frenchie were Platonic Life-Partners with a bit of Parental Substitute thrown in, as of the season 4 finale they are an official couple.
Roaring Rampage of Revenge: After Frenchie lets her out of her cage she immediately starts slaughtering the gangsters who imprisoned her. She then escapes the lair, seeks out the woman who trafficked her and mauls her into Ludicrous Gibs.
She Cleans Up Nicely: Kimiko looks quite pretty after she combs her hair and puts on clean clothes. Butcher forces her into a dress and heels for an assassination gig in Season 3 and while she hates it, she certainly looks gorgeous.
Ship Tease: Large quantities of it with Frenchie. While they remain friends, she is by far the closest to him out of all the other Boys and there are numerous moments between them throughout the series that blur the line between friendship and romance. Season 3 blurs things further when even after rebuffing him in Season 2, she expresses a desire to run away with him and even kisses him whilst in hospital. Season 4 confirms that they have feelings for each other, but Kimiko insists nothing can ever happen between them and he should be with someone else if it makes him happy. By the end of the season, they admit their feelings for each other and become an Official Couple.
Silent Snarker: She's unable to speak, but she can still make mocking expressions and give you the finger.
Sir Swears-a-Lot: When she finally talks in Season 5, she proves to be one of the most vulgar characters on the show. She explains that in addition to physical therapy and literal therapy she also learned to talk by watching a lot of TikTok.
The Smurfette Principle: She was the only woman in the team before Annie showed up.
The Speechless: She's been mute since the day she was kidnapped. Her sole vocalization is a peal of laughter in the season 2 finale — because she's about to kick Stormfront's ass.
Suddenly Speaking: Downplayed. After roughly two seasons of absolutely no vocalizations, she begins cackling at the final episode of Season 2 right before she kicks the shit out of Stormfront.
In Season 3, Kimiko has two fantasies where she sings as if she were the star of a musical. The second one begins with her croaking out a lyric to a surprised Frenchie before she goes full tilt and sings.
In Season 4, after she finally admits she loves Frenchie and he reciprocates, seeing him be mind controlled and lead into captivity by Cate makes her finally find her voice again, screaming one Big "NO!" after another as Sam holds her back.
Season 5 finally has her transition fully into being able to speak, and became quite a Motor Mouth in the interim between the seasons while in hiding. Hilariously, she lampshades the reason as a full aversion of There Are No Therapists by going through intensive speech therapy to overcome her trauma that left Kimiko mute to begin with.
Super-Strength: She's strong enough to tear through people like butter, mutilating humans in many different ways. Although she is not the strongest compared to Supes such as Homelander, Queen Maeve or Soldier Boy, Kimiko is still above the likes of Mesmer, Splinter, Firecracker or Crimson Countess.
Super-Toughness: While not bulletproof, she is still tougher than an ordinary human.
Terrorists Without a Cause: The "Shining Light Liberation Army" that she and her brother were forcibly recruited into is not a real organization, and the show discusses nothing about their ideology or goals. Their name is an apparent allusion to the Shining Path, a real far-left terrorist group in Peru.
Those Two Guys: She and Frenchie are attached at the hip and often get into situations side by side.
Token Super: Before Annie joined them, Kimiko was the only one on the crew with Compound V in her veins, unlike the comics.
Took a Level in Cheerfulness: She's distrustful, reserved, and incredibly aggressive when we first meet her. Her brother's death doesn't help matters throughout Season 2, but her smiling at Hughie in the opening episode demonstrates that she's become much more approachable. Upon Season 3, she's visibly radiant on a good day.
Took a Level in Kindness: She goes from being a dangerously unstable and ill-tempered factor (sourced from her trauma) that The Boys need to figure out how to deal with to becoming a fiercely protective and kind warrior who looks out for them all - especially Frenchie.
Trauma Button: The very sight of Stormfront, her brother's killer, sends Kimiko into a mix of anxiety and rage. M.M. notices it and keeps her calm.
Seeing a child trafficking poster, especially one used for false political accusations, spurs her to down several beers in the middle of a mission.
Twofer Token Minority: A quadruple minority even, as Kimiko is the only woman of the group, the only Supe (both before Annie joins), the only East Asian, and is mute, making her the only one with an explicit disability.
When She Smiles: Tends to wear an angry scowl most of the time but when she's happy and smiling, she's absolutely radiant. She does it much more often as the series goes on.
Wolverine Wannabe: She possesses a Healing Factor and had a Dark and Troubled Past involving being experimented on to give her powers and become a Living Weapon. She pretty much has everything but the Wolverine Claws, though her fingers come close enough.
The Worf Effect: She's defeated and nearly killed by Black Noir and Stormfront to show how powerful they are.
Worf Had the Flu: After the black bag operatives tranquilize her to bring her in, they keep her separate from Frenchie and Milk and pump her full of more sedatives via IV, so she's useless to the team even after they break her out.
You Killed My Father: The Shining Light killed her parents in front of herself and her brother. As soon as she saw a member she recognized, she snapped his neck and then pretty much ripped his head off. Again after Stormfront kills her brother in front of her.