Abusive Parents: Her father was a Stage Dad who got her on Compound V to perform in pageants and competitions, earning money to gamble it away at Circus Circus.
Action Girl: She is a powerful combatant only second to Homelander (and Soldier Boy by proxy). While she's comparatively weaker than Homelander, she's also a much better fighter than him, as shown in their fight.
Action Girlfriend: To Elena, who is just a mere woman.
The Alcoholic: She apparently has been one for awhile, as her ex notes "you're not going to your meetings". She relapses hard after Flight 37 and when Elena leaves.
Allegorical Character: She is supposed to be for feminism and, in Season 2, lesbianism. She is branded by Vought as "Brave Maeve" and hates every second of it (since she's bi, not lesbian), but is worn down enough she doesn't bother to fight it.
Armor-Piercing Response: Once Ashley finds Maeve in bed with two men and is informed that Elena left Maeve, the publicist starts berating her for going against her new image as a lesbian icon. Maeve weakly and bitterly responds by telling Ashley to "act like a fucking human being for once". Then Ashley sincerely apologizes.
Badass in Distress: Upon learning she is working with Butcher, Homelander keeps Maeve locked up in a place powerful enough to resist her strength.
Barefoot Captives: When Homelander puts her under lock and key, she's only provided the barest essentials, shoes not included. She eventually escapes like this and rendezvous with the Boys still looking ragged. It's mostly Played for Laughs given that she's got Super-Toughness and it doesn't hamper her one bit, while her dirty bare feet on his couch puts M.M. on the brink of puking on the spot.
Big Damn Heroes:
Her first scene in the series is saving a pair of civilians from being run over by a truck.
She serves as this for Starlight twice in season 2, swiftly taking down those who were crushing her in battle.
Big Sister Instinct: She is very protective of Annie and sacrifices her powers to protect her at the end of season 3.
Bi-Wildered: Ashley insists on marketing her as gay even though she's actually bisexual.
Boring, but Practical: Unlike most other heroes, Queen Maeve doesn't have one or more special powers that only apply to her or at best very few supes. All she has is enhanced physical characteristics, something that almost every supe has. But she has it to a much higher degree than most others, making her pretty much the most powerful character in the entire cast besides Homelander and Soldier Boy, even without any extra abilities.
Breeding Slave: Homelander plans on forcefully harvesting Maeve's eggs in order to produce the perfect, powerful children he always dreamed to have with her.
Broken Bird: Like Annie, she started off as an idealistic aspiring hero who wanted to save people before turning into Vought's puppet and Homelander's accomplice.
Queen Maeve: Twenty-three year old, bright-eyed, ass you could bounce a quarter off of. I really did want to make a difference. I really did care. I was just like you. And then, I started giving pieces of myself away and... I guess I gave away everything.
Bruiser with a Soft Center: Maeve's an Amazon-themed supe who acts aloof, but her heart is always in the right place even if her will is weak.
Byronic Heroine: An alcoholic, cynical, broken woman who started as a huge idealist in her past, only to get trapped by the corruption of the Seven and Vought and her inner desire to do good but at the risk of her beloved ones.
Captain Ethnic: A subtle example. Her hero persona is Irish-themed, having red hair and being named after Medb, anglicized as Maeve, a legendary queen/goddess in Irish mythology. Not to mention that her actress is Irish.
Combat Pragmatist: In the fight against Stormfront, she decks her when she's distracted with someone else, gangs up on her with two other people, stomps on her head while she's on the ground, pulls her hair... nothing is out of bounds for Maeve.
Cool Crown: Owns a silver tiara.
Crazy-Prepared: Judging by how quickly she came to Starlight's aid, she apparently keeps an Almond Joy close at hand in case she needs to use it against Black Noir.
The Cynic: She seems to be the most experienced member of the Seven alongside Homelander, and is accordingly very jaded and often unfriendly.
Cynical Mentor: She plays the role of an extremely jaded but genuinely guiding and helpful figure to Annie/Starlight.
Death Faked for You: After being hit by Soldier Boy's blast in the Season 3 finale, she goes missing and Vought declares her dead, with Ashley erasing the only recording proving her survival and rescue by the Boys.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Of the Flawless Token. For the majority of season 1, Maeve keeps her bisexuality a secret and has to enter a relationship with Homelander for the sake of publicity and protecting Elena at the same from Homelander, who jealously murdered a man for hitting on her. When Homelander reveals her sexuality on live television to deflect the question of diversity, Maeve is beyond furious with him and Vought envelopes her by quickly marketing her as an LBGT icon. Vought is incredibly blatant about objectifying her as a gay hero despite Maeve's many attempts to tell them she is actually bisexual and extremely uncomfortable with being solely defined by her sexuality.
Defector from Decadence: When Compound V's existence is leaked to the press, Elena suggests that this is a chance for her to leave the world of superheroes behind.
Defrosting Ice Queen: She warms up in time to Starlight simply because she doesn't want to see Annie becoming another her.
De-power: While she survives being at the epicenter of Soldier Boy's blast, she loses her power as a result. She's content to settle down to a normal life with Elena afterwards.
Dirty Coward: As her ex-girlfriend Elena puts it, Maeve is afraid of standing up for herself, asking for help, and everything else. She sheds this status when she finally stands up to Homelander and refuses to back down on her threat to release the Flight 37 video.
Disney Death: She somehow survives falling from the Vought tower along with Soldier Boy while he was using his Power Nullifier blast. Everything makes it seems she died until she appears fine (albeit powerless) afterwards.
The Dog Bites Back: After spending much of the series being intimidated by Homelander and playing along with Vought's humiliating schemes, Maeve finally gets her own back by threatening to release footage recovered from Flight 37 to the world, exposing Homelander for the sociopath that he really is. While Homelander threatens to destroy everyone and everything if she does, Maeve retorts that she would be satisfied knowing that he would never again be adored by the multitudes, leaving Homelander speechless.
Dude Magnet: She's a redheaded beauty that sleeps with several men to cope with her trauma and depression. It's revealed she's bisexual, and she ends up leaving with her girlfriend at the end of Season 3.
Earn Your Happy Ending: After all the crap she goes through, she gets to settle down with Elena and live a quiet life.
Everyone Has Standards: What finally convinces her to help the Boys in the Season 2 finale is when she finds out Stormfront is a literal Nazi.
Extreme Doormat: Hanging around Homelander and witnessing his depravity in person for so long has beaten her into absolute submission, and she acts less as a fellow superhero to him and more of a sidekick. Homelander is quite surprised when she finally stands up to him, as he can't remember the last time it happened. She's this for Vought as well; her years working under their PR thumb has beaten any resistance to their marketing strategies out of her. Elena is dumbfounded that Maeve raises precisely zero protest to being branded a lesbian for the Brave Maeve campaign when she is, in fact, bisexual, or Vought's frankly clueless approaches to marketing her and Elena as a couple and the line of "Brave Maeve" products.
Eye Scream: Homelander gouges out her eye during their fight in the season 3 finale.
According to Homelander, she saved a young girl from her insane father by flicking a pen into the man's eye which could make the above a case of Karmic Injury.
Flawless Token:
In-universe. While Maeve is a fundamentally decent person, she's far from flawless, but after being Forced Out of the Closet by Homelander on national television, Vought sees this as a marketing opportunity to extend representation and begin reworking their upcoming movie and marketing to emphasize this. Maeve is not fond of this arrangement, feeling objectified for her sexuality and not being treated as a person. As shown by her conversation with Ashley, who tried to get her back with Elena just for the cameras at the court case. When she's presumed dead, the first thing the media mentions in her memoriam is that she was a lesbian.
Out of universe she's still a pretty close example. She's stronger, more competent, and far more heroic than any male member of the Seven,note  and in fact she and Starlight are both coincidentally the most moral members of the team and the only two females (aside from Stormfront's brief turn in season 2). She's notably never shown committing any great crimes, unlike all of the recurring male members, aside from keeping silent about Flight 37 which was only because Homelander bullied her into it.
Fatal Flaw: Cynicism. Whatever idealism she once had was stamped out of her once she was exposed to the full depravity and vapid nature of The Seven. This makes her into a harsh and jaded individual who has become complicit in The Seven's misdeeds. She eventually grows out of it once she meets Starlight, who she sees herself in. Starlight gives her the hope and strength to finally break free from The Seven.
Fate Worse than Death: She doesn't seem afraid to be killed by Homelander, but the thought of being kept alive so that he can harvest her eggs terrifies her.
Foil: A subtle one to Butcher. Both of them are bitter, morally bankrupt people who practically ooze toxicity and act as a corrupting influence on their protégé figures (Annie and Hughie respectively). Maeve, however, ultimately registers how awful she's become and how her cynicism and cruelty have affected Annie, and advises her to stay optimistic and be herself. Billy, conversely, stays fixated on revenge and keeps trying to get Hughie to myopically pursue it along with him, even at the expense of their comrades. Both have had troubled relationships with their romantic interests, but whereas Maeve stays away from Elena for fear of what may happen if Homelander catches wind of them together, Billy deliberately seeks out Becca in hopes of prying her away from Vought.
Forced Out of the Closet: Homelander tells the world she is gay (actually, bisexual) while they're on a talk show, after Maeve kept it secret with him as her beard.
Gayngst: During Season 1, Maeve is still in the closet, to her ex-girlfriend's dismay, and one part of their relationship crumbling involved Maeve being unwilling (or unable) to come out as bisexual. Though she officially dated Homelander for a while, there's zero affection between them, indicating he was just her beard. In Season 2, Homelander spitefully outs her on national TV, with Vought rebranding her as a lesbian icon (they don't care that she's actually bisexual) and trying to get Maeve back together with Elena. She doesn't seem enthusiastic, though Maeve goes along with it.
Good Is Not Nice: She will often insult and taunt others, especially Starlight for her naivety, seeing her as an annoying goody-two-shoes. Maeve is not a pleasant company to be around, but she was the only member of the Seven before Starlight's arrival that cared about being a genuine hero.
Guest-Star Party Member: She occasionally allies with the Boys, eventually fully joining in the climax of Season 3 before her seeming Heroic Sacrifice that allows her to live her life away from Homelander's torment.
Heel Realization: She gets a rather extreme one of these after Homelander talks her into abandoning a plane full of people to crash in the ocean, and again after a pretty harsh "The Reason You Suck" Speech from Annie.
Heroic BSoD: She has one after Flight 37, getting drunk and showing up at her ex-girlfriend's house. She even tries to drunkenly make out with her.
Heroic Sacrifice: Subverted. She jumps in front of Soldier Boy's blast to save the Boys and company from it, but in the end, she survives, though powerless and badly injured from it and her fight with Homelander.
Immune to Bullets: And is proven in the form of a tribute to Wonder Woman when Homelander shoots some ammunition into Maeve's chest in order to fake a terrorist attack. When she escaped from Vought custody, the guards fired at her, to no effect.
Improbable Aiming Skills: With a year prior present events, Maeve saved a little girl from her Ax-Crazy father who was holding a gun at her head, by throwing a pencil in his eye, from a distance of 25 meters.
It's Not You, It's My Enemies: Or rather, her teammate. After keeping it bottled up for years, Maeve finally tells her ex-girlfriend Elena this is the reason they can't be together. Homelander views Maeve as his, and has violently murdered at least one Hollywood producer who flirted a little too much with her. On finding out that Maeve was with Elena, he outs her spitefully in revenge on live national TV.
I Just Want to Be Normal: After everything she's been through, Maeve is totally over the Supe lifestyle and is happier than we've ever seen her at the end of season 3, when she gets to live a normal life with Elena after faking her death after being de-powered by Soldier Boy.
Jerkass to One: She really doesn't like Hughie or his baby-face, and never passes up an opportunity to insult or make fun of him just because. This is even after she fully turns against Homelander and Vought, and actively helps the Boys. Annie usually being in the same room as him is just about the only reason she doesn't swat him then and there.
Kingpin in His Gym: Queen Maeve is shown easily defeating a number of burly men in her gym whom she's sparring with.
Knight in Sour Armor: She certainly wants to do good for the world. But the idealism has been broken by all those years under Vought, as Maeve makes clear whenever she's discussing heroism with Starlight.
Lady Legionnaire Wear: Her gear is a combination of Xena's and Wonder Woman's costumes.
The Lad-ette: Maeve developed this personality over the years while dealing with Homelander and the toxic environment of Vought. She spends a lot of time being drunk, is verbally aggressive to almost everyone, swears like no tomorrow, enjoys sparring, and has threesomes from time to time. She's also quite the Ms. Fanservice.
Lipstick Lesbian: Bisexual variation of this trope. Maeve is long-haired, wears feminine clothing, and it turns out that she's a closeted bisexual (though outed as a lesbian, with Vought sticking to the label as it's "easier").
Meaningful Name: Her superhero name, Queen Maeve, is the Anglicised spelling of Queen Medb, a powerful fairy queen in Irish mythology who often acts as an antagonist against some of that mythology's most powerful male heroes (particularly Cu Chulainn in The Cattle Raid of Cooley). One of the Vought marketing guys also refers to her as "the Empress of the Otherworld" when he's pitching his concept for Maeve's public relationship with Elena in Season 2. In Irish mythology, the Otherworld is the fairies' homeland. It makes sense that Vought would play up a mythological angle for Queen Maeve's image, since she's their counterpart to Wonder Woman, who has a mythos steeped in Greek and Roman mythology.
Metafiction: She's an Expy of Wonder Woman, who was created by bisexual writer Charles Moulton, who claimed he always saw the character as bisexual as well. The character's first experiences with romance were with girls due to living on an all female island, but because her main love interest is the male Steve Trevor, her bisexuality is often ignored or forgotten about. In universe, Maeve's bisexuality is actively glossed over by publicists because of the gender of her partner.
Morality Pet: She's one of the very, very select few people that Homelander cares about even a little - that being said, it's in an obsessive, twisted way due to his inability to handle rejection, which is one reason why Maeve hates him so much.
Movie Superheroes Wear Black: She wore bright blue in the comics, but wears rust red and iron colored armor in the show.
Muscles Are Meaningless: While Maeve is not exactly willowy, she isn't very muscular either. She's still an incredibly strong supe.
My Suit Is Also Super: Despite taking a fair number of powerful hits, Maeve's suit goes undamaged throughout her endeavors. Even Homelander and Soldier Boy don't do more then scuff it.
Named by the Adaptation: She went unnamed in the comics but is named Margaret Shaw here.
Nigh-Invulnerability:
In her first appearance on the show, Maeve stops an out-of-control armored truck with her body. She's completely unharmed, the truck all but disintegrates around her.
She's Immune to Bullets, not even acknowledging bullets, such as when she casually walked into the middle of a shooting.
Averted when she had to save a school bus early in her career and ending up breaking every bone in her arm. It never entirely healed right.
Zig-Zagged in her Season 3 fight with Homelander. He does some impressive damage to her, including gouging her eye out. But at the end, she tackles a detonating Soldier Boy out of the tower, free-falling with him for several stories and survives, though all her injuries are intact because of Soldier Boy's Power Nullifier explosion.
No Bisexuals: Invoked Trope and deconstructed to an extent. She ends up on the brunt end of this in the second season, when she's Forced Out of the Closet: Vought's PR staff immediately pivots towards turning her into a lesbian icon, and outright turn down the idea of acknowledging she's attracted to men because it's more cut-and-dry that way, and they believe that Viewers Are Morons.
Not Afraid of You Anymore: Throughout the first and second seasons, Maeve was crushed under Homelander's controlling thumb and was often forced to compromise her principles to go along with his will. At the end of "What I Know", she reveals the footage she has of the Flight 37 disaster, threatening to leak the footage if Homelander doesn't stop his hunt against Starlight and The Boys.
Not So Stoic: There are occasions, such as during the Flight 37 incident where her cynical, disaffected mask slips. When she's forced to leave the passengers, including a little girl she befriended to die, she's visibly shattered.
Not So Above It All: She's a very polite person. But when she leaves to see Elena in the hospital, Ashley's complaints about abandoning the incoming press junket lead Maeve to Flipping the Bird.
Ooh, Me Accent's Slipping: Dominique McElligot's natural Irish accent can be heard peeking through on a few occasions.
Pet the Dog: She's the kindest of the Seven to Starlight and genuinely wants to save people even though her experiences left her jaded.
Preserve Your Gays: Erik Kripke declared that for all the hardships Maeve endured, he always wanted her to have a happy ending and intentionally subverted the Bury Your Gays trope for her.
Psychological Projection: In Season 1, Maeve assumes that if she is apathetic about heroism, Starlight must be the same secretly and accuses Annie of doing the things just to keep the appearances for fame and money. Annie reveals to her that she used to read her biography as a child and believed that Maeve was truly a heroic figure. Annie ends her rant by telling Maeve she now believes all her heroic acts were probably just PR lies, leaving Maeve speechless.
Rebuilt Pedestal: Growing up Starlight wanting to be just like Maeve (to the point she had to get second copy of Maeve's autobiography because she wore the first one out reading it so many times). Similar to the other members of The Seven, Starlight loses all respect for Maeve due to her "bottomless causal cruelty". However, when Maeve tells her that she really did use to be the hero she looked up to and that Starlight should keep being a real hero, the pedestal is rebuilt a little. It is further rebuilt when Maeve saves Annie's life against Black Noir and The Boys' lives against Stormfront.
Revenge Before Reason: She's usually about saving innocents first. But when the opportunity comes to kill Homelander, even when he's trying to stop Soldier Boy from killing a child, she takes it.
Secret Relationship: With Elena. Maeve tries to keep Elena in the dark out of fear that Homelander might kill her.
Sex for Solace:
She tries to hookup with her ex after the Flight 37 incident, but Elena refuses.
In Season 2, after Elena leaves her, she is shown in bed with two men.
She has sex with Butcher in Season 3 after drinking with him and realizing he's a person who hates Supes, Homelander, and themselves even more than she does.
Shadow Archetype: Maeve is exactly what Starlight would become if she gives up on everything she stands for because of Homelander and Vought. Maeve tells Starlight that she used to be same idealist young girl, excited to be a heroine and help the people, until she started to give pieces of herself away. In season 2, Starlight starts to take same route as Maeve, by becoming cynical, giving up her Christian faith and ideals and for a while, just doing whatever Vought is asking her.
Smoking Is Not Cool: Shown vaping or smoking occasionally in season 2, and has a cigar box laying around in her apartment. Rather than a vector of glamor or badassery, it's instead shown in scenes where her trauma or anxieties emerge, implying it's a form of Drowning My Sorrows, alongside her alcoholism.
The Snark Knight: She's not very social and dishes out mostly bitter snide remarks. When she tries to give a genuine advice to Starlight about not letting Vought get to her too, Starlight just tells her to make "whatever shitty comment [she] is gonna make" and live her alone.
The Smurfette Principle: She used to be the only woman in the Seven before Starlight and Stormfront joined the team.
Spared by the Adaptation: She ultimately survives her Heroic Sacrifice in the show. The same can't be said for her comic counterpart.
Statuesque Stunner: She is a 5ft 8 (173 cm) beautiful redheaded woman.
Stealth Hi/Bye: In episodes 7&8 of season 2 she manages to sneak up on Black Noir, Stormfront, and Homelander to save the day each time.
Strong Flesh, Weak Steel: In the first episode, Queen Maeve jumps in front of the truck that was about to run someone over. She is completely unhurt, while the truck instantly has its engine crumble to pieces.
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: She is usually a huge jerk, having to be on guard all the time due to Homelander's threats and mood swings, and she didn't have anyone nice to be nice back to during her time the Seven. She finally shows her good side after Starlight's arrival and getting back with Elena.
Super-Strength: She's implied to be about the only Supe who can match Homelander in this department. Proven in the Season 2 finale, where she utterly demolishes Stormfront in a fistfight. This is later proven true in the Season 3 finale, where she manages to be the first character on-screen to make Homelander BLEED. Season 1 establishes a few hard limits for her - she broke every bone in her arm trying to stop a bus from falling off a precipice, and being in a crashing plane would kill her.
Super-Toughness: Perhaps the most durable Supe behind only Homelander and Soldier Boy; bulletproof, tanking a moving armored truck with her body without a scratch, and enduring even Homelander's laser beam in her chest, leaving no mark, while it was able to burn Stormfront in the same location.
Suspiciously Similar Substitute: Played With. While she made an appearance first out of the universe, In-Universe, she succeeded Crimson Countess in the role of the sultry redhead who is the lover of the leader of her team and strongest superhero in the world.
Token Good Teammate: Queen Maeve is shown to be more self-aware about how she, the Seven and other supes are not really heroes, but has just been browbeaten into accepting what is going on. She does often have a more moral reaction to some of the horrible things she sees the others do, and at other times tries to actually be heroic when possible.
Tough Love: She's a firm proponent of this: her Establishing Character Moment has her harshly tell an emotional Annie (who'd just been blackmailed into going down on The Deep) to clean herself up. While it comes off as bitchy, it's because she doesn't want Annie to be seen as weak and vulnerable in the wolves' den that is Vought Tower.
Uptown Girl: She is Queen Maeve, the dignified amazon of the Seven, and in love with ordinary Elena.
Warts and All: Annie admired Maeve all her life and was quite disappointed to learn that the real Maeve is nothing more than a cynical alcoholic who doesn't care about the greater good. Annie doubts for a while that Maeve was ever heroic, which serves a catalyst for Maeve to prove to Annie that none of her heroic deeds were manufactured by Vought.
Wonder Woman Wannabe: Her "Amazon"-esque outfit and powers, along with alcoholism and cynicism make her a darker take on this trope. That said, her name and the design of her costume have more of a Celtic theme, as opposed to Wonder Woman's Greco-Roman inspiration.
World's Strongest Woman: Appears to be the physically strongest female supe, as demonstrated by her dismantling Stormfront in their brief 1 v 1 after Stormfront had just wiped the floor with the Boys, Kimiko, and Starlight at the same time. She can also outmuscle Noir, who's been an Implacable Man in the first two seasons. She even manages to hold her own against Homelander himself in hand-to-hand combat.
"You Used to Be Better" Speech: Starlight gives Maeve a pretty brutal one, in which she emphasizes that the older heroine used to be one of Annie's personal idols for her selflessness. It ends up leading Maeve to rediscover why she became a hero in the first place.