'90s Anti-Hero: She presents like one, with an edgy codename, dark color scheme, evil-looking purple lightning, and her open disdain for the company signing her paychecks. The fact that she has Vought's backing plays a big role in the "hero" presentation and enables her to gain public influence and a significant civilian following.
Accent Slip-Up:
When Homelander confronts her over her meme campaign, she says to "get with the times", followed by "God knows I did" in a very light German tone.
When she tells Homelander about her true past, she briefly sounds more German, particularly when she pronounces the words "Berlin" and "Himmler". She fully reverts to the German tongue after Ryan fries her with his heat vision.
Achilles' Heel: Her body is Nigh-Invulnerable, but her eyes are not.
Action Mom: She had a daughter with Vought named Chloe who grew old and died of Alzheimer's a few years before the events of the show.
The Ageless: The Boys are surprised when a witness identifies 1970s superhero Liberty as Stormfront. Annie points out that they don't know everything that Compound V can do. She was born in 1919 and stopped aging when she became Frederick Vought's first successful test subject, making her 101 at least during the events of Season 2.
Allegorical Character: Stormfront represents the Internet-based Alt-Right movement, using a variety of tricks to create online engagement and propping herself up as a "tell it like it is'' figure to spread her Nazi-like ideology. The fact that she is an actual WWII-era German Nazi also makes her one to Operation Paperclip and how it allowed multiple war criminals to evade justice as long as it matched American interests.
All Germans Are Nazis: In-universe, Vought makes a movie adaptation depicting her as a blonde who speaks in Gratuitous German, thus emphasizing the evil of her white nationalism by making her seem less American. However, Stormfront herself, though German, isn't a straight manifestation of this trope, as her story arc focuses much more heavily on Naziism amongst Americans rather than treating it as an intrinsic facet of all German individuals.
Always a Bigger Fish: Under different circumstances, she would probably be the most powerful Supe around, with the ability to fly, her super strength, her immense durability, and her ability to shoot lightning. Here she still wouldn't be able to hold a candle to Homelander.
And I Must Scream: She ends Season 2 as a triple amputee covered in agonizing fourth-degree burns, her Healing Factor seemingly not strong enough to undo any of the damage, but still too potent to let her die.
Angry White Man: Or rather, Angry White Woman. She believes whole-heartedly in "white genocide", and thinks that people of color are trying to destroy white culture. She tries to indoctrinate Ryan by mentioning it. Not that this stops her from trying to kill other white people, such as Ryan's mother Becca, right in front of him.
Arch-Enemy: She's this to Kimiko, after killing Kenji.
Arc Villain: The main antagonist of the second season, overshadowing both Homelander and Edgar with her influence over Vought and her plans for a Fourth Reich of Supes.
An Arm and a Leg: Ryan lasers her, dismembering all of her limbs and burning her alive. While she has been shown capable of regeneration, she's too severely injured to be able to restore her limbs.
AstroTurf: This is one of her specialties. She's got her own personal troll farm consisting of five guys on laptops, whom she claims she practically pays with Arby's gift cards, constantly churning out memes. Despite its small size, it's effective enough to overshadow Homelander's $273 million Vought-backed "Saving America" campaign.
Ax-Crazy: Not as apparent as Homelander, but there are signs of Stormfront acting needlessly callous and brutal, such as her unprovoked attack and slaughter on black people during her fight against Kimiko and Kenji. By the time she is outed as a Nazi to the public, beaten down by Starlight, Queen Maeve and Kimiko and stabbed in her left eye by Becca, Stormfront is so worn out and demented that she attempts to strangle Becca to death in a fit of rage and frustration.
Back for the Dead: After previously being a major character in Season 2 she only has two brief scenes in Season 3 before committing suicide off-screen.
Bad Influencer: Very social media savvy, and an absolutely horrific racist.
Battle Couple: Becomes this with Homelander once they get together.
Been There, Shaped History: She's shown in a photograph attending a social function with Joseph Goebbels and Heinrich Himmler themselves.
Be Yourself: Perhaps a deconstruction of the trope. She's self-confident and (mostly) honest with her beliefs and opinions, won't let anyone tell her what to do, and has fully accepted and embraced herself and her desire to see the light in people's eyes go out when she kills them—particularly people of color.
Big Bad Duumvirate: Enters into an Unholy Matrimony with Homelander in Season 2, planning to use him as a figurehead for her white supremacist movement.
Big Bad Wannabe: Gets reduced to this in Season 3. After being publicly denounced, she's crippled by Ryan and rendered bedridden. Without most of her limbs she still tries to manipulate Homelander into beginning her Reich but he irritably rebuffs her, causing her to fall into depression and kill herself.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Stormfront seems upbeat and outgoing at first glance, making a big show of being in favor of feminism and equality... before it turns out that she is in fact a horrendous racist who deliberately targets people of color during her battles.
Black Eyes of Evil: Overlapping with Glowing Eyes of Doom. When she's using her lightning powers at high intensity, her eyes turn pitch-black, with dots of magenta light in the center (which might or might not be reflections of the lightning bursts). And boy, is she anything but a Villainy-Free Villain once the audience gets their first glimpse of who she really is.
Blatant Lies: When her Nazi ties come out, she says that she plans to explain it away by saying that they were photoshops and deepfakes. Uh, sure. Granted, she says this in the midst of her breakdown and as a show of false confidence toward Starlight.
Body Horror: After Ryan uses his Laser Beams to try saving his mother from being choked to death, what remains of Stormfront is a hideously immolated torso that is nearly unrecognizable had it not been for the remains of her costume and her mindless rambling in German.
Brainy Brunette: A very dark example. She’s shown to be extremely good at manipulating masses and rallying her to her racist cause, just with a calculated use of internet memes and rousing speeches.
Breakout Villain: Despite, or maybe because, of her atrocious personality, Stormfront is the first character from the main series to gain a leading role on her own spin-off show with the upcoming prequel Vought Rising, where she will share the spotlight with Soldier Boy.
Bullying a Dragon: Stormfront starts a campaign against Homelander that affects his popularity just to prop herself up. Of course, making a fool out of Homelander with memes, has an answer from him. He visits her to demand explanations and she calls his need for love pathetic. It only takes Homelander lighting up his eyes for her to apologize for pushing him so far.
Canon Character All Along: Liberty is brought up with her picture in the show as an old superhero who hadn’t appeared in the comics with it being revealed later that she was Stormfront’s previous hero identity.
Captain Geographic: Her costume during her time as Liberty.
Combat Sadomasochist: In addition to enjoying watching the life drain from her victims' eyes as she kills them, Stormfront also enjoys Homelander scarring her with his laser eyes for sexual thrills.
The Corrupter: During her time with Ryan's training session in using his Laser Beams, Stormfront decides to play a hand in lecturing the boy in how to unleash them. And she does this by telling him that he should focus on his hate on someone, and mentions "white genocide" in an attempt to get Ryan to start embracing her beliefs.
Covert Pervert: While she definitely has a "rougher" image than Starlight, she turns out to be much more depraved than she ever let on. She's heavily implied to be a sexual sadomasochist, considering how she enjoys watching "the light go out" and her Destructo-Nookie with Homelander. Then it's revealed that, as Liberty, she apparently founded Herogasm with Soldier Boy, who describes her as a bit of a freak in bed.
Dark Action Girl: Stormfront is a supe with the ability to shoot lightning out of her fingertips who also happens to be a virulently racist Nazi who wants to influence Ryan with her beliefs, which makes Homelander visibly uncomfortable.
Deadpan Snarker: Which, combined with her Gadfly persona, makes her more disarming.
Stormfront: Vought won't let me have pockets in this [costume]. You can see every crease in my ass. You can practically see up Starlight's uterus. You want to talk about girl power, let's talk about getting some pockets!
Deconstructed Character Archetype:
A walking one of female empowerment tropes like You Go, Girl! and Be Yourself. Stormfront being just as strong as Homelander causes a lot of tension between them and it's later revealed that Homelander's powers were partially based on hers, meaning Stormfront isn't proving her power for herself, she's proving her power to purposely undermine Homelander. Stormfront is also very comfortable with who she is, but who she is is a thoroughly despicable neo-Nazi, except without the 'neo'. In general, Stormfront seems to be a display of how corporate interests will corrupt feminist messages to empower unsavory individuals, and then use said feminist angle as a shield against criticism. This is especially biting considering Stormfront's extremist leanings.
Greater-Scope Villain and Descended Greater-Scope Villain: She was arguably the most important villain of the story as an immortal superpowered Nazi who's playing a Long Game plan to cause a global race war. However, her ability to implement said plan was severely limited by the fact that she was just one person, so others had long since circumvented the conspiracy she and her husband created, all in the name of profit. By the time Stormfront tries to steer her goals more directly with Homelander, her Chosen One couldn't have been more disinterested in her goals. Ultimately, her creations slipped out of her control and continued on even after her ignoble death. Allowing Homelander to take center stage as the true villain of the story, while she’s long-forgotten.
Despair Event Horizon: Homelander completely rejecting her Nazi ideology appears to be this for her, compounded by the crippling injuries she suffered at the end of Season 2. By the next episode, she's completely catatonic, realizing that everything she and her husband worked for with Homelander was ultimately All for Nothing and she's no longer in a position to keep it going herself, she commits suicide by biting off her own tongue later in the day.
Destructive Saviour: She intentionally causes loads of collateral damage when chasing down Kimiko and Kenji, causing havoc in a predominantly-black apartment building and killing residents purely out of racism.
Destructo-Nookie: She and Homelander end up doing this. Mainly because they both get off on physical violence in the bedroom.
Devil in Plain Sight: See her quote at the start of her entry. As an overtly 'alt-right' super who calls herself 'Stormfront' (the name of perhaps the most infamous neo-Nazi forum in the history of the Internet) it's obvious from day one what she is, with her very presence serving as an increasingly darkly comic demonstration of just how blatant you have to be in your fascism for people to go 'oh, yeah, right, that's a Nazi'. It takes The Reveal that she's literally a surviving member of Hitler's inner circle for her to finally become an unacceptable public embarrassment.
Dies Differently in Adaptation: Her comic counterpart died from getting stomped to death by Butcher, Mother's Milk, the Frenchman and Love Sausage. Here, she instead commits suicide by biting off her own tongue.
Dirty Coward: Her arrogance, sadism and belief in the might of the strongest disappear when she's faced with an actual threat as illustrated by her fleeing after Maeve, Starlight and Kimiko utterly trounce her in battle.
Dragon Ascendant: Once the wife and most ardent supporter of her equally-racist husband, Dr. Frederich Vought's work to elevate whites to superhuman and rule other races, Stormfront's own superhuman abilities see her live on long after her husband's death and she works even into the next century to usher in their horrific ethnostate.
Dressed Like a Dominatrix: An outspoken, teasing, attractive woman that wears a dark, form-fitting leather bodysuit with heels, a high collar and a deep neckline. Fittingly, she actually engages in violent sadomasochist play with Homelander. Take that as you may.
Driven to Suicide: Having been rendered permanently bedridden following the Season 2 finale and following Homelander vocally rejecting her Nazi ideology, she ultimately kills herself by biting her own tongue off in Episode 2 of Season 3.
Establishing Character Moment: Stormfront's first appearance has her wandering onto Homelander and Maeve's PSA shoot while streaming to her social media audience on her smartphone, which both highlights one of her advantages against Homelander and foreshadows the disruptive role she plays in Season 2. She also catches Homelander and Ashley off-guard by announcing that Mr. Edgar has signed her on to the Seven, showing that she has the power to bypass Vought protocol and flaunts that power to her potential rivals. Her sudden fascination with Homelander's eyes also, foreshadowing another aspect of her.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
The sixth episode of Season 2 reveals that, by some miracle of God, she isn't completely heartless to a degree. She reveals to Homelander she was Frederick Vought's lover and the mother of their daughter Chloe, who passed away beforehand. Stormfront feels all alone now that everyone she cared for is dead. After she gets fried and dismembered by Ryan, she mumbles to herself in German about an outdoor picnic she had with her husband and daughter.
She also shows Homelander photos of her with some old friends, and speaks lovingly of them. It'd be touching, if she wasn't talking about Hitler's inner circle, and the architects behind Nazi Germany's atrocities.
Even though Homelander being a handsome blond blue-eyed Übermensch played a big role in admiring him, Stormfront is genuinely attracted to him.
Even Evil Has Standards: As bad as Stormfront is, even she (like everyone else) despises The Deep, and outright calls him an idiot for joining a scientology cult. Then again, given that his last name is Moskowitz, and she's who she is...
Evil All Along: Stormfront's appearances during her first two episodes have her being snarky and affable, enough that Starlight and the audience find her likable. It's not until the end of the third episode, when she massacres an apartment building full of black people and brutally kills Kenji after calling him a "yellow bastard", that it is shown to us that she's a psychotic, superpowered racist.
Eviler than Thou: It speaks volumes about how truly vile Stormfront is that Homelander comes across as less evil by comparison. Even though Homelander believes Supes are superior to all regular humans, at the very least, he doesn't kill other people solely by the color of their skin. Homelander also doesn't think that being white makes him superior to everyone else; it's mainly his powers that make him think he's a god. Even though he’s shown to be a bigot himself, at least it can be said that Homelander’s racism makes him more of the condescending asshole variety rather than a serial killer. By the Season 2 finale, pretty much everyone except for Homelander has put aside their differences over their mutual hatred of what she stands for. By the beginning of Season 3 though, Homelander is shown to be be completely weirded out by her extreme Nazism.
Evil Wears Black: She's a racist murderer in black leather.
Eye Scream: On the receiving end of it from Becca. With a combination of being revealed as a Nazi and getting beaten down by Starlight, Maeve and Kimiko taking a toll on her mindset, she doesn't take it very well.
Face of an Angel, Mind of a Demon: She's played by the very pretty Aya Cash, but she's the most vehemently bigoted character in the series, to the point that even Homelander finds her bigotry discomforting. While Homelander generally doesn't care about the collateral damage that he causes (beyond the PR hit that he takes), Stormfront goes out of her way to kill civilians, especially if they aren't white.
Faux Affably Evil: Stormfront plays herself up as a champion for equality and women's rights, but is later revealed to be a vicious racist. She makes a racist remark about Kimiko's brother as she kills him. In 1972, she killed a black man after wrongfully accusing him of being involved in a robbery.
Fate Worse than Death: After she loses an eye to Becca, Ryan uses his heat vision on her, which leaves her body missing four lower limbs and covered in burns up to the fourth degree, but apparently still alive, as Homelander declares that she was moved to an undisclosed location. Season 3 shows her confined to a hospital bed, still with nasty burn scars all over her body.
Fetish: It's implied that she's a sexual sadist, judging by how weirdly turned on she is by killing people. Her behaviour towards A-Train and Kenji as she strangles him also suggests that she has a race humiliation fetish.
Flying Brick: Super strong, super durable, and has Not Quite Flight with her lightning powers.
Foil:
To Starlight, being the new female recruit to the Seven in Season 2. Starlight started off as idealistic and innocent before being gradually broken by the reality of corporate superheroics; by contrast, Stormfront joins up as a snarky, rebellious Anti-Hero from the get-go. Moreover, while Starlight retains her aspiration to do good by working on the inside to expose Vought's crimes, Stormfront represents the most zealously intolerant ideology imaginable and is only engaging in superheroism to further a divisive political agenda. Both possess powers that rely to some extent on electricity, though Stormfront evidently generates it while Starlight manipulates it.
She is also one to Homelander in that both are heavily preoccupied with shaping their superhero persona. Whereas Homelander aspires to become The Cape befitting his A God Am I aspirations, Stormfront revels in generating controversy by rebelling against usual superhero conventions. Their methods differ as well: Homelander takes advantage of Vought's massive PR machinery to manipulate public opinion, but Stormfront manages to rally considerable support on a shoestring budget.
Foreign Wrestling Heel: Vought's movie adaptation depicts her as a blonde who speaks in Gratuitous German in order to frame Naziism as an inherently foreign concept rather than a pervasive ideology amongst the United States.
Foreshadowing: Her line before killing someone: "I like to see the light go out..." foreshadows her being fried by Ryan's eyebeams.
Next to her left-parted hair, you can see her hair has a undercut. It's a style that was a popular symbol of the working class in the 1920s & 30s due to its simplicity, eventually being co-opted to some degree by fascists.
When she demands Homelander to laser her breasts, she gets off on the pain it causes. She is later fried alive by Ryan's heat vision.
The Gadfly: She has no filter and prefers it that way, never paying any heed to what others think or feel about what she has to say. She's darker than most examples though as she's actually genuinely very racist, and when around A-Train she takes delight in making veiled dog-whistles at the expense of his race, only to deny any racial bias when called on it.
Gender Flip: She was originally a man in the comic.
Girlboss Feminist: Stormfront initially portrays herself as a "girlboss" who uses social media to rebel against Vought and promote feminist values, especially within the male-dominated Seven. Of course, this being The Boys, she's later revealed to be a World War 2 era Nazi who murders minorities for fun. Her so-called feminist values only go as far as uplifting parts of the "Aryan" race.
Glowing Eyes of Doom: Overlapping with Black Eyes of Evil (see above).
Hand Blast: She shoots lightning from her hands.
Hate Crimes Are a Special Kind of Evil: She joins the team as a "Take-no-shit", "Tell-it-like-it-is" superheroine that becomes a social media darling and gains a number of fans for her provocative and hilarious memes, often poking fun at acceptable targets (and team leader, Homelander). It's later revealed that she is a literal Ageless Nazi whose end goal is to steer American public opinion towards fascism and white supremacy. In addition to supporting the standard Nazi war crimes, Stormfront is shown to have framed and maimed an innocent black man for crimes he never committed. Onscreen, she tears down a traumatized Starlight for being raped by their teammates, murders a community of African-Americans and tortures and kills an Asian man when out of the public eye, spearheads a master plan to stop non-whites from getting access to the Super Serum, and murders a child's mother in front of him because he "belonged with [their] kind" (he was a super and his mother wasn't). Her vile actions make her the enemy of almost every character in the story, especially after her identity as a Nazi is exposed. Even Homelander, the man she loves, has to publicly disavow her in order to salvage his reputation as a superhero.
Hated by All: After her Nazi ties are revealed to the public, she's dropped from the Seven like a hot potato, and her adoring internet fans turn on her instantly. She doesn't take it well.
Hate Sink: Despite her redeeming qualities, she is still meant to be completely unsympathetic and despicable. She is smug, sociopathic, and racist. It's very telling that Homelander is nowhere near her level.
Hell-Bent for Leather: A black leather-wearing villain who doesn't hide her physical appeal (if only to push her agenda).
Hoist by His Own Petard:
Having spent much time utilizing social media to cultivate a loyal following of racist zealots, Stormfront's plans begin to unravel after her Nazi past is leaked on the internet, accompanied by catchy memes.
After Homelander advises that hatred for someone can trigger Eye Beams, Stormfront suggests that Ryan could hone his hatred through fear of harm coming to those he loves, though her example of "white genocide" is lost on him. Stormfront is ultimately done in by trying to kill his mother Becca, in the process becoming the first person that Ryan truly hates, which leads to her being incinerated.
Humiliation Conga: First, Stormfront's shady past is leaked. Immediately, she loses her job, loses Homelander and Ryan (both of whom she genuinely loved) due to Vought having to condemn her, and becomes the laughing stock of the world. Her own fanbase and memes turn against her in an instant. Then, she gets the absolute shit kicked out of her by Starlight, Maeve, and Kimiko (two of whom were supposed to be her teammates and two of whom are minorities that she looks down upon). Then, not only does she get her eye stabbed out, but it's by a completely mundane and powerless person, which would be especially embarrassing to her as a Supe supremacist. And then finally, she's blown to smithereens by her own son-figure, reduced to a smoldering, blubbering, dismembered mess. Within the span of just a few hours, Stormfront's reputation, job, family, powers, body, mind, and dignity are all irrevocably taken away from her. And it is glorious.
Hypocrite: Her very-effective social media blitz presents her (increasingly blatantly fascist and white-supremacist) views in contrast to Vought's carefully-managed PR, using her seeming authenticity as a shield in comparison to corporate phoniness. But, as an original-recipe Nazi, she's no less determined to hide every part of herself she doesn't consider marketable for her cause.
According to Soldier Boy, it also turns out that she (as Liberty) started Herogasm, the most debaucherous pansexual orgy imaginable. You better believe the Nazis would've considered that degenerate. Furthermore, she would've been doing all of this while she was married to Vought, meaning she either committed adultery or polyamory. Either way, Stormfront did a very poor job at upholding Kinder, Küche, Kirch.
Immune to Bullets: Close-range shotgun blasts bounce ineffectively off of her.
In the Hood: As Liberty she wore a large white hood that covered her eyes, likely to keep her face unrecognizeable from people who might still know her from her Germany days. She dropped it when she became Stormfront as by then it would been too long for anyone to recognize or believe she was that same woman.
It's All About Me: She is ultimately just as concerned with turning superheroic endeavours to her own ends.
Jerkass Has a Point: While a Super Supremacist that's just as bad as Homelander, she gets introduced with negative quips towards her employers, the type of marketing and the media, initially earning Starlight's admiration.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: She's well versed in social media and capable of talking negatively about Vought and her celebrity status to the point where Starlight looks up to her for doing so. Her story about wanting to go for Halloween as Pippi Longstocking and not caring about what others think hits home with Starlight as well. Then she shows her true colors by slaughtering black civilians and Kimiko's brother.
Kick the Dog:
Some viewers may have been charmed by her willingness to mock Vought and Homelander in the first two episodes of the second season, but any remaining affection is quickly dispelled when she slaughters nearby black civilians during a mission, seemingly just for the fun of it, followed by slowly and painfully killing Kimiko's brother.
She seems to be just a bit too snide about trying to poison Ryan against his mother and then taking Ryan away from her. This is made even worse by the fact Stormfront is (was) a mother herself.
Knight of Cerebus: Stormfront's introduction in Season two ushers in a much more serious tone. She's immediately shown to be an unpleasant and rude individual who rivals Homelander in arrogance and maintaining a facade. It only gets worse when her bigotry and sadism show in fights, and it's revealed that she's one of the original Nazis, having much slower aging as a result of the original Compound V doses, which is how she keeps her youth in the modern era. Oh, and she teams up with Homelander, doubling the trouble.
Lady Macbeth: Not that Homelander was ever a good person, but she encourages him many times to do her biding, like trying to convince him of becoming the leader of her dream army of Aryan Übermensch and take over the world.
Laser-Guided Karma: She pushes a Social Darwinist agenda and was a part of the Nazi party. She ends up getting burned alive by Ryan, one of the few who is actually objectively stronger than her.
Also, it's quite ironic that a Nazi ends up getting curb-stomped by an Asian woman, a Christian, and a bisexual woman in the form of the show's other major female Supes. Also, she ends up mutilated and bedridden (something that could have her killed during the infamous Aktion T4), hairless and covered in severe burns, much like what a victim of her beloved Final Solution would have looked like.
In Season 3, Homelander refuses to follow his so-called "destiny" of leading a superhuman army of "Aryan Ubermensch" that Stormfront preached to him for over a year's worth while crippled. While Homelander's refusal to follow Stormfront's ideals, and by extension the Nazis, are out of selfishness, he's actually being a much more accurate version of the Übermensch described by Friedrich Nietzsche, while the Nazis took that philosophy and corrupted it to their own means.
Love Father, Love Son: She was involved with Soldier Boy in the 1970s prior to being involved with Homelander, his son, in the present day, although she probably didn't know they were related.
Manipulative Bitch: She's excellent and maintaining excellent PR, through careful social media manipulations.
Meaningful Name: As with the original comic character, Stormfront is a full-blown Nazi. Her name also happens to be the same as an infamous Neo-Nazi internet forum founded in 1996 and existing to this day.
Plus she has electricity and Not Quite Flight powers, like Storm (ironically, given that the latter is black).
Mind Over Matter: Her lightning powers also give her the ability to lift and move things with her hands in tandem with electrical shocks.
Monster Progenitor: The very first supe created by Frederick Vought.
Moral Myopia:
Despite being an outspoken feminist who advocates against sexism within Vought, she has no problem engaging in the same discrimination against people of color. Feminism is also anathema to the Nazi ideology of kinder, küche, kirche ("children, kitchen, church", basically German for Stay in the Kitchen).
She has the audacity to tell Ryan in Season 2 that "bad guys want to hurt us, just because of what we look like" — when those are her beliefs.
Ms. Fanservice: Just look at her outfit.
My Life Flashed Before My Eyes: If you translate the German monologue she mumbles after getting Mustafared by Ryan, she's flashing back to an outdoor picnic she had with her husband and daughter back in Germany.
Mysterious Past: It's bad enough that Stormfront once was another superhero under the name of Liberty, who once killed a man just for being black and in actuality is over 70 years old, not much else is known about her. Stormfront eventually admits to Homelander that she is just over 100 years old (101 to be exact), having been the first successful test subject for Compound V (and later became Frederick Vought's wife!), hoping to carry on his ideological aspirations by building an army of supermen through his company. She also used to be a member of the Church of the Collective. She left when they started inviting people that made it, in her eyes, not "pure."
A Nazi by Any Other Name: The more fantastical racism comes from her view of Supes and creating more of them with Compound V. She's played this way in a modern context though, using memes to spread her agenda and comes off as an alt-right troll given superpowers. This then gets subverted when it's revealed she's not only an actual Nazi, but literally comes from the time of the original Nazis.
Nice Job Fixing It, Villain!: She refuses to let A-Train back on the Seven because he's black. This gives him the motivation to find dirt on her Nazi past then release it to the public, leading to her downfall.
Nigh-Invulnerability: Once Homelander decides to have an Interplay of Sex and Violence with Stormfront, he lasers her in the chest at her command. While this produces a nasty-looking burn, it doesn't seem to bother her much, even after an extended treatment ("Told ya - I'm hard to break"). However, this does not extend to her eyeballs.
Noodle Incident: Soldier Boy claims that he founded Herogasm alongside her (when she was known as Liberty) and that "she was wild", which implies they had a sexual relationship.
Not Quite Flight: Every time she is seen taking off or landing, she uses her lightning powers to support herself, implying their connection to her propulsion. She doesn't freely levitate like Homelander can.
Not So Similar: To Homelander. Both are Smug Supers that see themselves as above everyone else thanks to their powers and vye for the attention of the population, but for different reasons. She also tries to relate to him by speaking about how she experienced losing everyone that she loved until she was completely isolated due to her immortality. The similarities stop with their motivations; Homelander Hates Everyone Equally as a Supe and is taken aback by the notion of "white genocide" while Stormfront has racial motivations for her violence and agenda. Homelander also seems to develop more genuine love for Ryan while she tries to constantly emphasize him as a Disneyland Dad.
Not-So-Well-Intentioned Extremist: During a conversation with Ryan, Stormfront insists that everything she does is to protect her race from a "white genocide" perpetrated by minority groups across the world. This is obviously just a flimsy, illogical excuse for her racism, to the point that even Homelander finds her delusions ridiculous.
OOC Is Serious Business: She spends most of the start of the season reacting to everything with scathing sarcasm and insults, and goes out of her way to aggravate and undermine Homelander as the leader of The Seven. When one of her cracks at his expense finally starts to push him over the edge, she is visibly intimidated enough to quickly back down and apologize, and finally explains her motivations to him in what seems to be a moment of genuine sincerity.
Older Than They Look: She's been an active hero since the 1960s when she went by the name Liberty. And she doesn't seem to have aged much in the meantime. Her non-aging may be a side effect of Compound-V. Stormfront eventually gives her birthdate as 1919, making her 101 years old as of Season 2, which is set in 2020. Her actress, Aya Cash, is also older than when the character was injected with V.
Outliving One's Offspring: Due to being ageless, she outlived her daughter Chloe, who died of Alzheimer's prior to the series.
Passive-Aggressive Kombat: How she "changed with the times." She can't afford to be openly racist like America or Germany was in the past, so she hides her bigotry behind "joking" insults and a veil of Plausible Deniability much like the alt-right. When she needles A-Train for his skin color, the man knows she hates him but cannot openly call it out because of her evasive answers.
Paper-Thin Disguise: One of her older victims Immediately recognizes Stormfront as Liberty in the paper.
Person of Mass Destruction: She is capable to destroy an entire apartment complex with her powers, which is shown while chasing Kenji and Kimiko to kill them.
Pet the Dog:
In a twisted sense, she tries to help Homelander reconcile with Ryan, saying that she knows what it's like to be separated from your child. She encourages him to sincerely apologize to his son for pushing him off the roof and calling him a "pussy". The problem is that the minute Ryan is willing to give his father a second chance, Stormfront decides to manipulate him into wanting to leave the compound forever, and his "normal" mother behind. She also attempts to comfort him when he can't use his powers... by telling him that it isn't his fault because minorities are trying to genocide white people like him.
The single decent onscreen moment is when she asks if Ashley is feeling okay, while Ashley is babysitting Ryan. Stormfront notes that Ashley is developing bald spots, and Ashley stops pulling hair out of her head on cue.
In a backhanded sort of way, she tells Starlight to be herself and not try to fit into the box that Vought is trying to force her into. It ends up backfiring on her, because Starlight chooses to side with the Boys against her by following her own morality rather than playing along with Vought literally whitewashing Stormfront.
Pint-Sized Powerhouse: She's visibly shorter than Maeve and Starlight but not any less powerful.
Police Brutality: If given the chance to, she'll indulge in this against black people; whether it's brutally murdering a person for possibly being a car thief, to just brutally assaulting and killing them for being in the same area as her when she's pursuing a target.
Politically Incorrect Villain: She views non-powered humans with Condescending Compassion. When chasing Kimiko and her brother through an apartment building she kills a black family for no reason and calls Kimiko's brother a "yellow bastard" when she kills him. Her current behavior dates back to the 70s when she was originally known as "Liberty", murdering a young black man she accused of robbery. Turns out she's actually been at this since the Third Reich, when she became the first Supe that Frederick Vought ever created.
The Power of Hate: Her team's putting down of Homelander in favor of her manages to earn her more support than Homelander's feel-good "Saving America" campaign. While he's love-hungry and obsesses over still being the face of The Seven, she's only counting on an angry Vocal Minority to accomplish her goal of a war. She says as much to Homelander.
Stormfront: You don't need 50 million people to love you; you need 5 million people fuckin' pissed.
Propaganda Machine: She has a couple of trolls churning out memes that execute her agenda. First it's to appraise her as a member of the Seven over Homelander, and later it's to clean Homelander's reputation.
Psycho Electro: One of her powers involves casting purple lightning from her hands, which she uses to murder innocent civilians just because they were black. And even barring her horrendous racism, she actually manages to be even more Ax-Crazy than Homelander.
Psychological Projection: She's a firm believer of the white genocide conspiracy theory, but really she's assuming that everyone is as murderously racist as her, which is false considering even Homelander reacts to her beliefs with bafflement.
Psycho Prototype: Stormfront was Frederick Vought's first successful attempt at creating a Supe, and boy did he nail the "'psycho" part right out of the gate. She's a literal card-carrying Nazi from the 1940s with electrokinesis and zero moral compass. Later Supes may have their issues, but they're well-adjusted compared to Ms. Patient Zero over here.
Purple Is Powerful: She shoots purple lightning and her costume follows a black and burgundy pattern, which suits well her power level and her past in the high ranks of Third Reich.
Putting on the Reich: Her design evokes Nazi imagery, with metal American flag armbands, a metal belt with a Reichsadler Eagle for the buckle, SS-shaped earrings, and a military-buzz-cut-based haircut. Not surprisingly, she's a violent racist and former subject/lover to a Nazi scientist.
Really Moves Around: After digging into her past, The Boys and Annie discover that she's been moved around and repackaged several times, starting off as Liberty and now going by Stormfront. Seemingly, it's due to her racist abuse of civilians beginning to get out, forcing Vought to move her elsewhere.
Red and Black and Evil All Over: Her costume is black with red piping and accents.
Refuge in Audacity: This is a big part of Stormfront's M.O., from casually murdering POCs to snarking at Vought and Homelander. In the case of the former, she trusts in her reputation (and the Vought propaganda machine) to make the idea of a racist supe seem absurd. In the latter, note that when Homelander confronts her over stealing his spotlight, she doesn't deny it; instead, she critiques how he handles his reputation and gives him pointers.
The Remnant: She is the very last of Hitler's Nazi Party, and is still trying to make its vision a reality even 75 years after its defeat.
Ripped from the Headlines: She's a pretty obvious parody of alt-right internet pundits. She constantly uses social media to garner admiration from the public and her name itself is a reference to the infamous Neo-Nazi website of the same name.
The Rival: The nature of her introduction — unilaterally assigned to the team after Homelander creates the super-terrorists and kills his handler — suggests Vought wants her to stop the Homelander from getting out of control (similar to Black Noir's role in the comics). It seems doubtful that she's powerful enough to take him in a head-to-head fight, although their sex scene in Episode 5 hints that she's at the very least almost as strong as him, and durable enough to tack his lasers at high power.
Sadist: First displayed in the third episode when she outs herself as a vile racist killing Kenji, quipping that she "like[s] to see the light go out" and stare her victims in the eye while killing them. She does this again in a time of anger after being outed as a Nazi, and takes her time trying to kill Becca to sooth her rage and repeating her statement while doing so.
Second Super-Identity: Stormfront isn't her original superhero name; once upon a time she was Liberty. Apparently Vought repackaged her and moved her around to avoid her violent racist outbursts being exposed. After discovering her past, they speculate that this has happened multiple times.
Serial Killer: Deliberately killing minority civilians during her battles and habitually murdering black motorists as Liberty point to her as being one, motivated by her racism.
Sex Slave: Homelander, in characteristic self-centered cruelty, keeps her on life support after Ryan torches her, and is implied he frequently propositions her for handjobs until she bites her tongue off in despair.
Shock and Awe: One of her powers is emitting lightning blasts.
Sincerity Mode: When Homelander is fed up with her snark and prepares his heat vision, she genuinely explains why she's enacting her plans and somewhat challenging his.
Smug Snake: She thinks highly of herself and clearly doesn't care about annoying/embarrassing others.
The Social Expert: She's familiarized herself with the internet and social media, hiring a small team of people to create online support of whatever is on her agenda. It's able to win her a lot of focus and successfully regains some of Homelander's lost reputation to the public.
The Sociopath: Similar to Homelander, she puts on a front for the media and basks in the public's adulation, while caring nothing for human life (particularly people of color, in her case) out in the field.
Spanner in the Works: She enters The Seven without Homelander's involvement and has a couple of plans of her own that will put them at odds with one another.
The Starscream: Subverted. For the first few episodes, Stormfront appears to be aiming to undermine Homelander's leadership and perhaps even take leadership of the group herself, her brutal racism making her appear an even worse candidate for the position. Halfway through however, Stormfront reveals she hopes to help mold Homelander into a more effective superhero and strengthen the grip he has on his base of followers. This goes deeper when she reveals she loves him as the embodiment of Aryan leadership and hopes he'll lead her and her racist followers on a campaign to exterminate minority races.
Starting a New Life: Apparently joining the Seven is this, as she's ruined her past heroic exploits after her extremely violent racism gets out of hand. She would have decades of experience doing this kind of thing, as she moved to America with Frederick Vought after the Nazis fell.
Straight Edge Evil: She, like Homelander, initially seems this way, not resorting to vices like sexual hedonism and substance abuse like pretty much every other Supe. Seeing how she's a former member of the Nazis, who were murderously prudish towards decadence, this would be quite in-character for her. However, with the revelation that she co-founded Herogasm, now she just comes off as a hypocritical degenerate.
Stupid Jetpack Hitler: Turns out she was a Nazi supersoldier, but also a neo-Nazi who carried on her beliefs even decades after the events of WW2.
Super-Soldier: Part of her arc is about her advocating for the use of Compound V-infused superbeings to combat the super-terrorist threat though it's really to form a Master Race of Supes to fulfill the Nazis' ideology. Considering her political views and how much they are influenced (after a fashion) by Friedrich Nietzsche, it's hinted that her intentions lean more into Übermensch territory.
Super-Strength: She overpowers Kimiko effortlessly and pretty much rips off Kenji's hands from the wrist.
Super Supremacist: She thinks that her powers make her above people without them, coupled with regular racism. She eventually reveals her regular racism and super supremacism are intertwined: she wants to create an "army of supermen millions strong", who will be used to win a race war against everyone on Earth who isn't white.
Super-Toughness: She has enough durability to be only annoyed being slammed into brick walls by Kimiko. While completely incapacitated, she still survives being lasered by Ryan.
Teach Him Anger:
She encourages Homelander to do this with his fans instead of seeking their adoration, clearly trying to mold him into a demagogue.
She also inspires Starlight to stand up for herself against A-Train and even Homelander.
Stormfront: Fuck this world for confusing nice with good. Be a bitch if you want. Be whatever. Just drop the mask once in a while. Feels good. You can finally breathe.
She then moves onto Ryan and tries to convince him that the non-whites want to kill them just for existing.
Team Member in the Adaptation: She joins the Seven when the Stormfront of the comics was affiliated with Payback, who she has nothing to do with here.
Übermensch: Her snarky attitude and disdain for those around her stems from this philosophy, as seen with the Be Yourself mentality of not caring about what others think of her and being confident and comfortable with a morality that makes sense to herself. Said morality means sadism, killing minorities out of her belief in racial supremacy, and forgoing ethics to get what she wants, seen with the Compound V experimentation at Sage Grove. It stems from the Nazi ideology's approach to this, being a direct member from the original party that wants an "army of supermen."
Uncanny Valley Girl: She's the loud new member of The Seven that has mastered her social skills for the public, who unnerves the others at Vought with her attitude and tends to have a concerning interest in Homelander's eyes...
Undignified Death: She suffers an even more humiliating demise than her comics counterpart did. Ryan, a seven-year-old Supe boy who had scarcely made any progress in training his superpowers, reduces her to a charred, limbless husk of a person with his Eye Beams, and she kills herself later on by biting off her tongue while in the hospital. At least her comics counterpart went out with a fight.
Unholy Matrimony:
By the end of "We Gotta Go Now" Homelander and her, the two most evil members of the Seven, have gotten together, having sex all over his apartment (trashing the place in doing so).
Stormfront's first lover was Frederick Vought, who created her as the first Supe while he was still a Nazi scientist, thus arguably making her the template for what Vought International's supe program eventually became. Since she was born in 1919, and was likely injected with Compound V sometime between 1939 and 1945, she is still between 20 and 26 years old physically, but is biologically 101 years old.
Unwitting Pawn: To Mr. Edgar. All of her outrage-stirring and anti-corporation propaganda is All According to Plan.
Viler New Villain: She debuts in Season 2 as the newest member of The Seven and immediately proves to be its most evil member yet, surpassing even Homelander, by being a Nazi who's subliminally indoctrinating her fans into their ideology.
Villain Has a Point:
After her Nazi ties have been revealed and she's on a murderous breakdown, she quips that "People love what I have to say. They believe in it. They just don't like the word 'Nazi'. That's all." While she's hyping up her own agenda, she sort of has a point; lamentably, people will find any and all sorts of bigotry palatable, and only hiss and spit once you call it what it is. Her propaganda campaign in the latter half of the season makes it clear how true this is.
Prior to the reveal that she's an unapologetic white supremacist who gets off on slaughtering racial minorities, Stormfront actually has a lot of valid points to make, publicly deriding Vought's shallow feminist campaign slogans and the notion that gender has anything to do with her competence as a superhero, while encouraging Starlight to actually live honestly rather than changing her life and personality to fit some Vought PR strategy... though she herself regularly hides aspects of herself she knows to be unpalatable and indefensible in order to adopt a posture of "authenticity" that advances her cause.
Villainous Breakdown: Stormfront becomes incredibly agitated and murderous the moment she finds out that her origins as a Nazi are leaked into the internet, courtesy of the Boys and A-Train. And after being fried by Ryan, she's left in a catatonic state, speaking German as she reminisces about her own daughter.
Villainous Legacy: After her suicide, her fans, the Stormchasers, continue praising her, pushing her hateful rhetoric even with her gone.
Villainous Rescue: She unknowingly pulls one when she arrives at Sage Grove just in time to subdue Cindy, who was seconds away from exploding the Boys and Lamplighter. Lamplighter promptly makes sure Stormfront never knows who she just rescued.
Villain with Good Publicity: In spite of her racist beliefs and murderous actions, she's an incredibly popular social media star. She loses it when her Nazi past is revealed to the public.
Visionary Villain: Her endgame is to start the Fourth Reich, using an adult-safe version of Compound V to create an army of racist white Supes that will control the world and destroy all other races.
Wearing a Flag on Your Head: A more subdued case compared to Homelander, with metal arm bracelets of the American flag. This was also what her costume was originally modeled after during her time as Liberty.
Who Wants to Live Forever?: Being over 100 years old, she outlived everyone that she ever knew and loved, including her own daughter. She's immensely unsettled by her status, choosing to live only because she sees potential in winning a race war that she believes is happening. When she's crippled, dying, disgraced, and can't indoctrinate Ryan or Homelander with her Nazi rhetoric any further, she sees no other reason to live and swallows her tongue.
Wicked Stepmother: She's clearly trying to supplant Becca in Ryan's life and is one of the vilest Supes in the series.
The Worf Effect: First, we see her tank Homelander's high-energy Eye Beams with only mild discomfort (if not arousal). Then, we see a completely untrained Ryan laser her to a limbless crisp, which not even her healing factor can reverse, begging the question of just how more powerful the kid is compared to his father.
World's Strongest Woman: She's definitely in the running for it - while she's not as strong as Homelander, she's definitely in spitting distance of him. Not only does she have a very overwhelming superpower in her lightning manipulation, she's also extremely durable to the point that it takes Kimiko, Maeve, and Annie all working together to take her down. This is compounded by the fact that she's been a Supe for almost 80 years, so she has a wealth of experience to her name that makes her a lethal hand-to-hand fighter too.
You Are a Credit to Your Race: She praises Edgar as very smart... for a black Muggle, that is.