The Ace: He's a skilled Ranger, tracker, swordsman, archer, healer, and a decent singer. He even resists the temptations of the One Ring, a feat his ancestor Isildur failed at despite having a higher pedigree.
Ancestral Weapon: Andúril, reforged from the shards of Narsil, an ancient heirloom of his line.
Asskicking Leads to Leadership: He's the Heir of Isildur and rightful King of the Dúnedain. He's a better tracker and woodsman than the Wood-elf Legolas, a deadly warrior, a skilled battlefield medic, strong-willed enough to use a Palantír and even wrench it out of Sauron's control, and wise enough to know he can't and must not use the One Ring.
Back-to-Back Badasses: With Gimli, during the Battle of Helm's Deep fighting the Uruk-hai.
Badass Longcoat: He wears a dark-green "ranger coat" throughout most of the series. Unfortunately, he sheds it when he becomes king.
Badass Normal: Until he gets the re-forged Narsil, which is a powerful artifact of a blade in its own right that gives him a major leg up in battle, Aragorn is this to a T as the most natural fighter of the cast after Boromir's death, even with his special heritage as the heir of Isildur. His first real fight on-screen? Tackling multiple Nazgûl at once in a bit of an ambush surprise and managing to ward them off by himself, even if only temporarily. He's considered one of the greatest soldiers of Man, if not the greatest, and earns that reputation. The only deviation is his Healing Hands, which he rarely uses in favor of more practical medicine.
Batman Gambit: Comes up with the plan to attack the Black Gate and personally challenges Sauron through the Palantir, knowing that Sauron would be so fixated on meeting the challenge since, in his mind, Aragorn must have the ring to be so bold. Sauron never would have determined that Aragorn was merely trying to distract him.
Battle Cry: Shouts "Elendil!" before jumping off a ledge onto a bunch of Uruks in Amon Hen. Also just tends to shout a lot in battle, as seen in Moria and Helm's Deep.
Big Brother Instinct: To the Hobbits, especially Frodo. Throughout the first film, Aragorn can be seen helping them with their swordwork, keeping them safe during the heavier battles, and at one point, even takes on an entire army of Orcs just to ensure that Frodo will get away safely.
Bling of War: Aragorn wears cool silver armour at his coronation, but it appears to be purely ceremonial, so this is Downplayed.
Boomerang Bigot: Downplayed. As noted under Adaptational Angst Upgrade. It's not a huge part of his personality, but it's definitely there to some degree. He's much slower to trust other Men than he is other beings, and the primary reason he runs away from his responsibilities as rightful king is because of his awareness of human failings and the realization those failings are in himself as he doesn't want to be king for fear of becoming a tyrant.
Blood from the Mouth: While fighting Lurtz, the orc headbutts him in the face and his mouth is bleeding afterwards.
Bow and Sword in Accord: He uses both bow and sword in the first movie, but he usually uses the bow only to open battle, staying in melee once it thickens.
The Captain: Of the Rangers of the North, and of the Fellowship after Gandalf's passage.
Character Development: Unlike in the books, Aragorn's belief in himself increases as the movies go on, as symbolized by tokens from people who believe in him more than he initially believes in himself:
First Arwen (his Love Interest) gives him the Evenstar.
Next Galadriel (Arwen's grandmother and thus his grandmother-in-law to be) gives him an elven knife.
Then he takes Boromir's bracers after the latter's death.
Finally, Elrond (both his father-in-law to be and a Parental Substitute) gives him Andúril, his reforged Ancestral Weapon, which convinces him to Dare to Be Badass.
Cool Sword: Andúril, naturally.
Cruel to Be Kind: After their narrow escape from the Mines of Moria, most of the Fellowship is extremely distraught at the loss of Gandalf and stop just outside the exit to mourn. However, Aragorn orders Boromir to get them on their feet and continue the journey, answering protests of not giving them a moment by noting that by nightfall, the area will be crawling with Orcs fully intent on killing them or worse, and the Fellowship must get to safety before dusk.
Cultured Badass: He's fluent in Elvish (and the Extended Editions show that he also understands Dwarvish and can horse-whisper), has travelled across most of Middle-earth gaining knowledge of the various realms and in his spare time reads and sings of legends.
Dark Is Not Evil: He wears rather dark clothing during his initial introduction and throughout the films until he dons on Gondorian armor for the final battle. It's the main reason why the Hobbits—Sam, in particular—are so mistrusting of him the first time they meet.
A Day in the Limelight: The Two Towers is this for Aragorn, as he has more screen time and character development than Frodo & Sam, the two main characters of the series.
Deadpan Snarker: Not to the extent as Gimli, but he does have some similar fire in him.
Aragorn: (to Frodo after he accidentally uses the One Ring and disappears) I can avoid being seen if I wish, but to disappear entirely? That is a rare gift.
Death Wail: Aragorn lets one out when he finds Merry and Pippin's elven belts on the Orc funeral pyre. They're not actually dead though, as he later deduces from his Ranger tracking skills. In real life, it was because Mortensen had just broken his toes on the helmet he kicked and they decided it fit the scene.
Deuteragonist: After Frodo leaves the Fellowship to go on his Ringbearer quest alone, Aragorn becomes the other central POV character, showcasing the military effort in defending against Sauron's forces.
Did You Just Flip Off Cthulhu?: He goads Sauron into the Final Battle by contacting him, showing him exactly who he is, and telling him to his face he doesn't fear him.
Disney Death: During a skirmish against some warg scouts in The Two Towers, Aragorn gets stuck in the saddle of a single warg that ends up running off of a cliff and into a running rapid. It's later revealed that Aragorn survived the fall before making his way back to Helm's Deep.
The Dreaded: Sauron is so terrified at the thought of Aragon potentially taking back the throne he sends everything at Gondor to raze Minas Tirith to the ground. Later on, Aragorn is able to get his full attention just by revealing he's still alive.
Earn Your Happy Ending: He must have the Enemy overthrown before he can become king and marry Arwen.
Engagement Challenge: As above.
Expository Hairstyle Change: After settling into Minas Tirith once Sauron is vanquished, Aragorn's hair is more finely groomed. He also sports a thicker beard at his coronation.
Face of a Thug: When Aragorn first appears in the Prancing Pony, he looks just as shifty as the other patrons. Keeping his face hooded up like the Nazgûl also makes him seem hostile. Once it becomes clear Aragorn's on the hobbits' side, he gradually shows himself to be a Nice Guy.
Finger Extinguisher: He extinguishes a flame with his bare hands to show how strong he is.
Freudian Trio: With Legolas and Gimli; represents the Ego.
The Hero's Journey: He has his own journey in the trilogy, separate from Frodo's quest to destroy the Ring. His duty is uniting the race of Men and leading them to fight against Sauron. Aragorn ends up happier and wiser at the end of his adventure, having married Arwen, united the kingdoms of Men, and helped save the world from Sauron's tyranny.
Heroes Prefer Swords: First a Ranger longsword, then his ancient heirloom Andúril.
Heroic Lineage: He is part of the long line created by both Beren and Lúthien.
Heroic Willpower: Enough to resist the One Ring and (with visible effort) even master the Palantír.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Legolas. Though it becomes a trio when Gimli enters the picture. Legolas's final scene in The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies seems to confirm this, making them actually the second generation with their fathers as precursor.
Honor Before Reason: The reason he undertakes his quest for kingship in the first place was because of his love for Arwen.
I Gave My Word: After Pelennor Fields, the army of the dead demand Aragorn release them, as he promised he would. Gimli points out they could still be useful, but Aragorn chooses to keep his promise. He also makes a promise to Boromir to not let Minas Tirith and Gondor fall.
I Just Want to Be Normal: Refused to follow his destiny for many years. Of course, in the third film, he embraces it wholeheartedly.
I Have Many Names: Aragorn, Estel (Hope in Sindarin, given by Elrond), Elessar (elf-stone), Strider, and Longshanks (the name Sam calls him at one point).
Incorruptible Pure Pureness: He resists the offer to take the ring from Frodo, whose effects were especially potent on mortal men. When confronting Sauron directly, it's implied the Dark Lord was trying to tempt him as he whispered the name "Elessar". Aragorn simply turns toward Gandalf and says "For Frodo".
Interspecies Friendship: With Legolas for about sixty years, starting from after the Battle of the Five Armies when Legolas tells his father he cannot go home with him and is in turn told to search out "a young ranger by the name of Strider". He has also known Gandalf for sometime as well, born from hunting Gollum together.
Jack of All Trades: Bordering on Master of All as he's amazingly proficient in a variety OF different weapons, disciplines, tactics, and languages.
Kissing Cousins: Arwen is technically his first cousin... sixty-seven times removed, since Aragorn is a direct male-line descendant of Elros Tar-Minyatur, the first king of Númenor and Elrond's brother (Elrond and Elros, being half-elves, were allowed to choose whether to be elf or man; Elrond chose the former, Elros the latter).
The Lancer: Downplayed. When Gandalf's leading, Aragorn tends to be the practically minded and cautious second-in-command.
Last-Ditch Dagger: Aragorn's main weapon throughout the trilogy is a two-handed sword (initially a generic longsword, then Andúril in The Return of the King), but in a Deleted Scene in The Fellowship of the Ring, Galadriel gifts him a short, curved elvish knife, which he carries as an Emergency Weapon for the rest of the series: he draws it while dueling Uruk-Hai Captain Lurtz at the climax of Fellowship only to have to deflect it with his sword after Lurtz pulls it from his own thigh and throws it at him, then uses it in the battle at the Black Gate in Return of the King to stab the foot of a troll who's standing on him.
The Leader: He's one for the Fellowship after Gandalf's departure, for an army of Elves during the Battle of Helm's Deep, for an army of undead Oathbreakers on the Pelennor Fields, and finally for the united Men of the West at the Black Gate. His people skills are largely more refined than any of the other heroes thanks to his travels giving him time to understand different cultures.
Looks Like Jesus: Bonus points for being the savior of Gondor with Healing Hands.
Loved I Not Honor More: Towards Arwen.
Master Swordsman: He is a master with the sword compared to Boromir's more brutal approach.
The Medic: He has Healing Hands and other special healing powers due to his lineage. Despite this, however, he does very little healing during the story, and completely lacks the typical squishiness of a White Mage.
Memento MacGuffin: The Ring of Barahir. Not explained in the films, but he is shown wearing it as an Easter Egg or Mythology Gag for readers. Elaborated in the Extended Edition of Two Towers, where Wormtongue mentions it to Saruman, who quickly figures out who he is.
Messianic Archetype: He shares this role along with Frodo. Also, he inspired Rohan and the rest of Middle-earth to fight for their freedom, plus he has gained more followers as he continued his journey. Being destined to be King of Gondor and being a descendant of Isildur, will make you this.
Mr. Fanservice: At least in the films.
Named Weapons: Andúril, "Flame of the West".
Neverending Terror: Since Sauron knew who he was, and what he was, Aragorn's spent his entire life being hunted by the dark lord's forces, looking to make sure he never gets to the throne. Aragorn's mother knew this as well, as Elrond recounts.
Elrond: In her heart, your mother knew you'd be hunted all your life.
Nice Guy: While the book version is a little bit more rude, bordering on Jerk with a Heart of Gold, here his kindness (which is always there and genuine, make no mistake) is more emphasised. He's considered by audiences to be the masculine ideal due to his strength and his kindness being in perfect sync with each other.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: He stops Théoden from killing Wormtongue because too much blood had already been spilled. Wormtongue turns around and gives Saruman the secret to defeating the defenses at Helm's Deep; thus, causing nearly all the defenders to be killed. Too much blood, indeed. (Though Saruman was already experimenting with explosives prior to Wormtongue's arrival, so he may have not revealed anything that wasn't already known to Saruman.)
Older Than They Look: In The Two Towers Extended Edition, there's an extra scene in which Eowyn is surprised to learn that he is actually 87 years old. He doesn't look ageless, however: he looks like a very fit and active man only half that age (Viggo Mortensen was 43 when the films started coming out), his hair flecked with a little gray. This is because he is a Dunedain (descended from the survivors of Numenor), "blessed with long life" - but not eternal life. The books explain that the Dunedain live about three times longer than regular humans (Aragorn ultimately lived to be over 210 years old).
Older Sidekick: To the Hobbits, at first.
One-Man Army: While he often has friends or an army on his side, Aragorn certainly kills enough Orcs in battle to qualify, and was very much this trope for part of the battle of Amon Hen in the first film. He has killed 60 enemies on-screen, but this also includes some Elite Mooks, and he certainly killed much more enemies during off-screen fighting scenes. Just remember the many war sequences.
Perma-Stubble: He has this form of facial hair throughout most of the films. By the time of his coronation, though, he grows it out into a full beard.
Rebel Prince: He chose exile instead of leading his people. It's pretty much the main reason why Boromir—who loves Gondor more than anything—resents him so much, at least at first.
Red Oni, Blue Oni:
He's the Blue to Boromir's Red. He's a more skillful warrior as well as an equally accomplished healer, and is very reluctant to take up his duty to defend his future homeland. He's also the one who refused to take the Ring from Frodo. Aragorn is also a bit cold and stern while Boromir is more boisterous. This even goes to their designs as Boromir is a bit better dressed and more well-kept while Aragorn is scruffier and his outfit is beat to hell.
He's also the Blue to both Legolas and Gimli. While the Elf and the Dwarf are quite fight-happy (not to mention competitive with each other), Aragorn's the one who defuses the tensions between others they come across before things get out of hand.
Requisite Royal Regalia
Crown of Gondor
Ring of Barahir
The-Sword-that-was-Broken
At the Black Gate he wears an especially lavish Gondorian suit of armour.
Rightful King Returns: Of course. Gondor's been waiting hundreds of years for The Return of the King.
Rousing Speech: Before the Battle of the Black Gate.
"By all that you hold dear on this good Earth, I bid you stand, Men of the West!"
Royal Blood: The purest now left.
Royals Who Actually Do Something: Spends the entire trilogy fighting Sauron's forces, whether it be orc, Nazgul, or anything else. He leads the defense of the Hornburg alongside Theoden and Haldir, then personally leads the combined armies of Gondor and Rohan at the Battle of the Black Gate.
Scarily Competent Tracker: At the beginning of The Two Towers, Aragorn and Co have been tracking down an army of Uruk-Hai for at least three days. When he arrives to the scene and finds the remains of Uruk-Hai that held Merry and Pippin hostage, he manages to piece together what happened that night by simply observing the lay of the land.
Shut Up, Hannibal!: Swiftly decapitates the Mouth of Sauron once he gets sick of his shit.
Supporting Leader: Former Trope Namer.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: He's definitely this in the films, especially when he cleans up nicely both during scenes in Rivendell and his coronation.
Tragic Keepsake: Subtle, but after Boromir's death, Aragorn dons his vambraces as he, Legolas, and Gimli set their fallen friend to rest. He wears these for the remainder of the series to honor both his friend and his promise to save Gondor. In Arwen's vision of the future, he's buried with them.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Though he doesn't really trust Boromir and they tend to disagree quite a lot, Aragorn's at least willing to hear out the other Man's hopes and fears regarding their people. They ultimately part as friends when Boromir dies.
Vocal Evolution: When he first appears he has a definite brogue to his voice - signifying his status as a ranger. As the trilogy progresses, his voice subtly changes to become more RP - and thus sound more regal.
Walking the Earth: He has spent many years as a Ranger roaming in the Wilds.
Warrior Prince: He is Isildur's Heir, after all.
Young and in Charge: Downplayed, as he is 87, but compared to Gimli and Legolas, who are both hundreds of years old, he is quite young. Nevertheless, he is the wisest among the three and their unquestioned leader.