The Ace: To almost ridiculous levels. In The Return of the King, he takes down a fully-armed War Mûmak and its crew all by himself.
Beauty Is Never Tarnished: All this pretty boy gets over the course of the original trilogy is a bruise and a little smudge of dirt. Elrond and Arwen by comparison visibly get more roughed up despite having less action scenes than him.
Bottomless Magazines: Over five films, he's run out of arrows exactly once, and he had already killed way more orcs than he had arrows in that instance.
Bow and Sword in Accord: He switches between his bow and his knives when appropriate. Elves in general are capable of both archery and swordplay.
Captain Obvious: "A diversion." So Named in Legolas: The Very Special Diaries, thus becoming Trope Codifier.
Cool Sword: Gets to wield Orcrist when his group captures Thorin and the other dwarves. Which may or may not be a deliberate Shout-Out to a certain Legolas Greenleaf leading Glorfindel's (i.e. the original wielder of Orcrist) group away from Gondolin after it fell and Glorfindel himself died at the hands of a Balrog. Also leads to Fridge Brilliance, as this could be the reason how this as well as Glamdring and Sting survived the fall of the city in the first place.
Character Development: It's evident that he used to be something of a Jerkass in his youth, as shown in Desolation of Smaug, compared to the much gentler soul he is in the Trilogy. This is apparent even in his appearance—Legolas is much paler in The Hobbit with particularly icy blue eyes, making for a visual Defrosting Elf Prince between the two trilogies.
Death Is Such an Odd Thing: Orlando Bloom said in the commentaries for the extended edition that this is what he was trying for, when the camera had its closeup on his face in the One-Woman Wail montage after Gandalf fell: he was coming to grips with what death was, as an elf whose only experience with it previously had been seeing enemies die in battle.
Dual Wielding: The only other weapons he ever carries is a pair of knives, and at one point Orcrist.
Elves vs. Dwarves: Like all other Elves, he views the Dwarves with disdain and even threatens to kill Thorin during his initial introduction in The Desolation of Smaug. For his part, it gradually comes to an end over the course of The Lord Of The Rings the more time he spends with Gimli.
The Fair Folk: His father is the king of them. One trait that other elves rarely display that he shows multiple times is that despite having the size and strength of a Man, he weighs very little. This allows him to walk on top of fresh snow and not even leave footprints and enables his incredible feats of acrobatics in combat.
Fantastic Racism: As shown in the second Hobbit movie, Legolas originally shared his father's disdain for anyone who wasn't an Elf, especially Dwarves.
First Injury Reaction: Legolas has this reaction in The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug, when he meets his Worthy Opponent in the form of Bolg, who manages to actually give Legolas a nosebleed. Legolas is clearly confused by the experience, and briefly looks at his own blood with surprise before going after Bolg again.
Freudian Trio: With Aragorn and Gimli; represents the Superego. However, he is the Ego in the group with Tauriel and Thranduil in The Hobbit films, having to balance out his father's aloof demeanor and Tauriel's hot-blooded personality.
Heterosexual Life-Partners:
Legolas and Aragorn have been implied to be and are frequently portrayed as this by the fans. His final scene in The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies seems to confirm this, making them actually the second generation with their fathers as precursor.
He eventually becomes this with Gimli by the end of the trilogy, to the point that they sail West together after Aragorn's death.
Icy Blue Eyes: His eyes are much paler in The Hobbit films then the original trilogy. This is a fitting visual metaphor since the younger Legolas is far colder in demeanor.
Improbable Aiming Skills: His aims are pretty much regular in the original, but taken to a ridiculous level in the PJ films.
Interspecies Friendship: Two of them.
He's been in this with Aragorn for about sixty years, starting from after the Battle of the Five Armies when Legolas tells his father he cannot go home with him and is in turn told to search out "a young ranger by the name of Strider".
Eventually, he forms another with Gimli. This is one of the first pairings of its kind in so long, as the Elves and the Dwarves have been in conflict for hundreds of years.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: In The Hobbit films, he's clearly in love with the elf Tauriel but when he sees that she's in love with the dwarf Kíli he does his best to warn her that it can't work out. Apart from that he doesn't interfere, and he feels sorry for Tauriel when Kíli is killed in the course of trying to rescue her from the Curb-Stomp Battle she's getting from Bolg. He goes on to save her himself, and finally succeeds in killing Bolg only after an epic battle. Not that it does him any good.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: In The Hobbit films. He's callous and insulting towards the dwarves, but he also doesn't share his father's class prejudices and cares about the wellbeing of the world beyond their borders. As of the Lord of the Rings trilogy, he's mostly dropped the "jerk" part of it and has become a nice, if mildly aloof, guy.
The Lancer: He's Aragorn's most trusted confidant. While they have personality traits in common, they don’t always agree on the best way to approach situations, and their fighting styles are largely opposite (archer and swordsman).
Long-Haired Pretty Boy: He's an Elf, so having long hair is inevitable, and Orlando Bloom's fine facial features compliment his long hair even more.
Master Archer: While Legolas was noted as a good archer in the books, the films exaggerate this skill of his: he manages to hit his targets while hanging upside down or surfing down a staircase while on a shield, and takes down a fully-armed oliphaunt with only his bow and arrows.
Missing Mom: His mother was killed by the orcs in Gundabad and he at one point tells Tauriel that his father has never even mentioned her since. It isn't until the end of the third Hobbit film that Thranduil notes that she loved her son more than anything else in the world — which is probably about half of what Legolas wanted to hear.
Mr. Exposition: When he's not being Captain Obvious. Legolas often speaks openly about the state of the weather as portents, such as when he notes a red sunrise as indicative of a massacre in the night and the dimness of the stars as hints that Sauron's influence is spreading.
My Species Doth Protest Too Much: While Legolas shared his species' Fantastic Racism, he did call out his father on their willingess to ignore what's happening in the outside world.
Never Gets Drunk: In the extended cut of Return of the King, he has a drinking contest with Gimli in which he only starts getting slightly tipsy after nine mugs of ale, at which point Gimil is plastered enough to pass out. His reaction to the tingling in his fingers implies that he's never even gotten a little bit drunk before.
Not So Above It All: At the end of the Battle of Helm's Deep, Gimli reveals that he beat Legolas's body count by 1. Legolas shoots the Uruk Gimli was brandishing as his trophy, arguing that since he was twitching it meant he was actually a tie-breaker. Gimli retorts by cranking the axe in the Uruk's skull, showing the corpse would involuntarily twitch regardless if Legolas had shot it or not.
Not So Stoic:
After fighting Bolg in Laketown, his reaction to being injured and unable to defeat a foe in single combat probably for the first time ever leaves him pretty stunned.
When Gandalf says that they're being chased by a Balrog, he is very clearly crapping bricks, as he's the one member of of the Fellowship other than Gandalf old enough to know exactly how terrifying that prospect is.
He's very quiet and calm, even in battle, but when Aragorn falls during his fight with the armored troll in Return of the King, you can see him really panicking. You can't hear what he's saying but even if you aren't an expert at lip-reading you can make out that he's screaming his friend's name. In three movies, he loses his cool exactly twice.
In The Two Towers, when a particularly antagonistic Éomer confronts the three, Aragorn's immediate reaction is to put a restraining hand on Gimli, who speaks up first. But when Éomer states that he'd kill Gimli without hesitation, Legolas goes full-on Tranquil Fury and draws an arrow point-blank on Éomer, telling him in no uncertain terms that he'd die first if he tried to pull anything stupid. Gimli's stunned reaction afterwards just seals the deal.
Odd Friendship: With Gimli, due to their feuding races.
Oh, Crap!:
In The Hobbit trilogy, he has a moment of panic when Tauriel is in danger and, for the first time, he has run out of arrows.
When the Balrog first makes its presence known in Moria, Legolas is visibly wide-eyed with fear. Justified as he probably knows what happened the last time an Elf tried to take on a Balrog.
He has a brief one in Return of The King when he realizes that through Pippin meddling with the Palantir, Sauron can see what's happening at Edoras.
Legolas: He is here!
One Elf Army: He racks up quite an impressive body-count across both trilogies.
Only Sane Man: Though Tauriel was first, he pretty quickly realizes that his father has flaws, seems to pay attention when Thorin saves his life, and agrees to help Tauriel with the orcs without much of an argument.
OOC Is Serious Business: The only time he ever appears frightened◊ in the trilogy is at the mention of the Balrog. With good reason: any and all military encounters between elf and balrog end with the death of the elf, and in ONE case, the death of the balrog as well. Glorfindel was one of only two elves to successfully slay a balrog (the other was Ecthelion, Second-in-Command of Turgon, High King of the Noldor), and for this deed, he was actually allowed to return to Middle-earth after his resurrection in Aman.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The blue to Gimli's red, being a stoic Elf who uses a bow to pluck off anything in his way.
Royals Who Actually Do Something: Though it only gets an offhand mention in the movies, Legolas is the Prince of Mirkwood and son of King Thranduil. Gets expanded upon in The Hobbit, where he disputes with his father over the course the Mirkwood elves should take after the escape of Thorin and Company.
Saved by Canon: In Battle of the Five Armies, he's practically invincible. No enemy can even scratch him and he seemingly has gravity defying powers, simply because he must survive to be in the next trilogy.
Screw the Rules, I'm Doing What's Right!: Disobeys his father and leaves Mirkwood with Tauriel to help fight the darkness, rather than close their borders and hide from it.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Legolas is the Sensitive Guy (Long-Haired Pretty Boy) to Gimli's Manly Man.
Shield Surf: He does this down some stone stairs during the battle for Helm's Deep, blazing a trail for shield surfers everywhere. He then surfs down the trunk of an Oliphaunt in the third film.
Short Range Guy, Long Range Guy: He's the long range guy (bow and arrows) to Aragorn and Gimli's short range (sword and axe, respectively).
The Smart Guy: Given his advanced age compared to everyone except Gandalf, it often falls to Legolas to give explanations or elaborate on complicated subjects.
The Stoic: Like his father and most of his elven kin, it takes quite a bit to surprise or frighten Legolas. His Not So Stoic expression when he first hears the Balrog in Moria speaks volumes about how dangerous an opponent it is.
Strong Family Resemblance: He greatly resembles his father Thranduil, essentially looking like a slightly younger version of him. It helps that aside from the various wigs and prosthetics, both Orlando Bloom and Lee Pace (who plays Thranduil) have strikingly similar facial features.
Superior Species: In the time it takes Gimli to kill two Uruk Hai, Legolas has already felled 17.
Throwing Your Shield Always Works: He does it at Helm's Deep; after sliding down the staircase, he picks up his shield and throws it at an orc, pinning him around the neck.
Throwing Your Sword Always Works: He throws Orcrist at a troll to save Thorin's life.
Took a Level in Kindness: He still has some Character Development to go through in The Lord Of The Rings, but he's far nicer there than he is in The Hobbit sixty years earlier.
Tranquil Fury:
In Desolation, he falls into one of these after Bolg successfully injures him, something that nobody else has managed. It was only a nosebleed, but the look on Legolas's face was of barely contained rage, and the last we see of him, he's on his horse, trying to run Bolg down and kill him in retribution. Which, given that Bolg is likely fleeing toward the Orc army moving out from Dol Goldur, is probably a bad thing.
Again in The Two Towers when Éomer threatens to kill Gimli. Legolas is not amused.
Unrequited Love: For Tauriel, as explored in the last two Hobbit films. Of course, never mentioning Tauriel throughout the original trilogy suggests he may have gotten over her (somewhat).
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Gimli. The fact that Legolas's father kept Gimli's father captive in The Hobbit doesn't help, either. Shown a picture of him, Legolas even asked if Gimli was an orc mutant before being told that he is Glóin's wee lad.
Warrior Prince: He's an elven prince, being the son of Thranduil, Elven-King of Mirkwood. He's also fully willing to throw himself into the heat of battle, up to taking down what essentially amounts to a war elephant by himself.
What the Hell, Hero?:
Delivers one to Thranduil after the latter decapitated Narzug, despite having vowed to release him.
In The Two Towers, he doesn't understand King Théoden's choice of sending both old men and young boys (at least the able-bodied ones), who have never fought in wars, to fight in the defense of Helm's Deep and doesn't hold back when bringing it up to Aragorn, who at least understands the Elf's point of view but also sees the reasons behind Théoden's choices a little bit better.
Wrestler in All of Us: He nails Bolg with a hurricanrana during their duel on the tower bridge.
You Can't Go Home Again: When the battle's done and the mourning starts, Legolas flat out tells Thranduil that, after all that's passed between them, he can't return to the forest.