Affably Evil: Despite his casual psychopathy, Carl in his earlier seasons still acted like a chipper pre-teen.
Ax-Crazy: He is… disturbed. He becomes somewhat more normal in later seasons, though.
Batter Up!: A Running Gag is Fiona taking the family weapon, a bat, out of his hands as he heads to school.
Berserk Button: Messing with any family member that's younger than him will certainly get on his bad side.
Birds of a Feather: With Bonnie; they meet in detention and discover they have a lot in common.
Blade Enthusiast: He tends to have a variety of shivs and other bladed weapons hidden all around the house.
Blood Knight: Carl used to be a bloodthirsty bully who enjoyed fighting and being violent. Even when he loses most of his appetite for destruction, he's still a vicious fighter.
Book Dumb: He's not the smartest when it comes to numbers and whatnot, but he's more than resourceful and cunning enough to accomplish goals.
Break the Haughty: It becomes this when he found out his friend, Nick killed a kid for stealing a bike, and has to go through because of it.
The Bully: To the other kids at his school.
Character Development: Receives a lot throughout the seasons, starting out as a borderline-psychopath, then going to juvie and joining a gang, before eventually quitting the thug life and deciding to become a cop. When he returns from military school at the end of Season 7, he has become a mature, dependable adult, a far cry from the psychopathic thug and bully he used to be. He still has a bit of a violent streak, though.
Cold Turkeys Are Everywhere: Carl gets a circumcision in Season 7 and while he's supposed to not have an erection for 72 hours, he keeps running into sexy ladies, requiring him to get his stitches redone.
Comically Missing the Point: He overhears Ian and Jimmy talking about Ian's relationship with Jimmy's dad in Season Three. This conversation then occurs.
Carl: Ian's dick was in your dad's mouth?
Jimmy: [nervously] It's a figure of speech, it's like sayin'… none of your business… your dick's in my dad's mouth, man.
Carl: Who says that?
Jimmy: [Pause] Gay dudes.
Carl: Is Ian gay?
Jimmy: No, no.
Carl: Is that what gay people like to do?
Jimmy: Jesus, forget it Carl. [walks away]
Damn, It Feels Good to Be a Gangster!: Played straight at first, as Carl proves to have a serious aptitude for the criminal life and is raking in cash, but he soon discovers the downsides once his friend Nick is sent back to prison for killing someone who stole his bike and the head of his gang beats him for not wanting to work on a particular day. By the second half of Season 6, he's gotten out of the gang life and has gone straight.
Dumb Muscle: Carl is stupid, and it's not even a case of Brilliant, but Lazy as he even has trouble with stuff he's interested in (knowing the math behind selling drugs). Despite these difficulties, he does have a sort of low cunning that he can apply in immediate plans of violence and thievery. And to be fair, he's the only other Gallagher to graduate High School by the end of the series.
Everyone Has Standards: In season 6, Carl is horrified when his friend Nick murders a kid for stealing a bike.
Expy: He had more than a few shades of Sid in his early characterization (such as melting his toys in the microwave and playing around with explosives).
First Kiss: He has his with his classmate Bonnie in Season 4.
Generation Xerox: Never explicitly stated, but Kassadi is his Monica.
Had to Come to Prison to Be a Crook: His stint in juvie helps him make serious connections and become a much more skilled criminal. In fact, one of his reasons for antagonizing the judge at his trial was so he could get an "education" in juvie.
Heart Is an Awesome Power: Tried to be a heroic cop but continually was disappointed by the corruption, laze or zeal in the police force. Was demoted into being a Meter Maid but actually realizes he can use his position to take pity on the poor car owners while vigilantly ticketing anyone with an expensive car.
Held Back in School: He's taking the sixth grade for the third time in Season 5.
Hero-Worshipper: He supports Frank the longest out of the kids, until Season 7 when he couldn't care less about him and outright states that he (and everyone else) hoped Frank was dead during his disappearance.
Heroic Comedic Sociopath: Given the nature of the show as a Black Comedy with frequent dramatic interludes, Carl's… activities are played as either serious issues for the family to resolve (or resolutions to serious issues) or as jokes that the family just shakes their head at.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Nick. Carl's heartbroken when Nick murders the boy who stole his bike and is sent back to prison.
Hidden Depths: He's an extremely skilled marksman, as shown in his experience at the shooting range in Season 7.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He gradually becomes more of this in the later seasons, before that he seems to care about Frank and his siblings as well.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: After four seasons of showing sociopathic tendencies and being surrounded by a family that flagrantly disregards the law, he becomes a low-level drug dealer. He then willfully goes to juvie, and leaves a more hardened criminal fully ingratiated with a gang.
Karma Houdini: Of being The Bully, courtesy of Frank. Averted in Season 5, where he gets caught by the police after using Chuckie as a drug mule, rejects legal advice, and demands to go to juvie.
Kick the Dog: In season 5, he treats his own nephew Chuckie like crap especially when he treats him as his “own” slave. Despite Frank getting Carl and Chuckie arrested, Carl played a part into it and then it got Chuckie in trouble with the drugs by the police.
Knight Templar Big Brother: Towards Liam. When he hears two kids in school laughing and making fun of Liam, calling Liam retarded, he beats them up to a pulp, despite them being older than Carl!
Law of Inverse Fertility: His sperm samples impregnate an older woman with six children, later she gives birth to his twins. He also may have impregnated a girl from one unprotected encounter.
Littlest Cancer Patient: Played With in Season 3, when Frank purposely convinces Carl that he 'caught' cancer from someone for monetary gain.
Morality Pet: Liam in earlier seasons, Nick and Dominique in Season 6.
The One Who Made It Out: Against all odds, he's the Gallagher child who receives the best shot at life by the end of the series (besides Liam, who's still a kid). Fiona, Ian, and Debbie are high school dropouts, and even Lip, who does graduate, ends up flunking out of college and working as a mechanic with a gig in petty crime on the side. Carl not only graduates high school and (mostly) puts his life of crime behind him, but also gets a legitimate job as a police officer.
Out of Focus: For part of Season 2, before having several storylines in Season 3, Season 4, and Season 6.
Pretty Fly for a White Guy: After serving a stint in juvie and becoming a full-on gangster. He even has cornrows and talks in a manner reminiscent of a rap/hip hop artist. It's lampshaded by his nickname, "White Boy Carl".
Put on a Bus: He goes to military school halfway through Season 7.
The Bus Came Back: He returns for the final episode in Season 7 after Monica dies.
Reformed, but Not Tamed: Even after learning his lesson about the brutality of the criminal gang life and dedicating himself to military school, he's still pretty ruthless.
Reformed, but Rejected: Even though he stops acting like a gangbanger, gets a job at the diner washing dishes and even has his cornrows undone, his girlfriend Dominique's Papa Wolf father makes it clear he will never accept him. Until Season 7, Dom's father realizes just how out-of-control his daughter is and starts bonding with Carl.
The Sociopath: He did try to kill Patrick at one point. Lampshaded by Fiona, of course.
Carl: Option four was kill Patrick. Why waste an option?
Fiona: [sighs] I'm raising a sociopath…
A Season 5 exchange revisits the idea:
Fiona: What if he shows remorse?
Carl: What's that?
Sadist: Carl seems to love causing pain towards others and was cold and ruthless towards his bullied victims.
Token Evil Teammate: Of the Gallagher clan. While every Gallagher causes trouble, Carl is notable for being the only one of them that's probably evil but also legitimately on the family's side (unlike Frank or Sammi). However, this seems to have been getting subverted in Season 6.
Took a Level in Kindness: He begins developing a conscience in Season 6 after realizing he wasn't cut out for a life of crime. The fact that he witnessed his grown-up bodyguard/friend/gang member kill a kid that stole his bike in cold blood probably had something to do with this.
Even though he’s still brash, he becomes more mature and less sociopathic in the later seasons.
The Unfettered: Carl's main positive trait is that he is absolutely willing to do anything to achieve his goals, and when his goals were "Save Frank" he proceeded to kidnap dogs to sell for drug money, which, upon failing, led to him stealing drugs, and then cripple Frank when he was unable to do it himself to get the insurance money to pay for surgery.