A-Cup Angst: Suffers from this before she hits puberty, very much gone in the later seasons when she has the largest bust of all the regular female cast.
Agony of the Feet: Three of her toes are badly crushed in an industrial accident. Frank cuts them off, after her and Liam's attempt at doing so themselves ends up with them fainting in shock.
The Baby of the Bunch: Even though she's not the youngest, everyone still treated her as this. But as of Season 4, she was desperately trying to outgrow this trope.
Beware the Nice Ones: Debbie's a real sweetheart, but Season 3 proved that you "do not F with Debbie Gallagher!", as she puts it. She nearly drowned a girl who was mean to her at the pool, glued shut the eyes of an abusive foster mother, and claimed Cousin Patrick molested her in order to discredit him and force him to let the Gallaghers stay in the house for low rent.
Bratty Teenage Daughter: She starts to develop some of the traits in Season 3, and is a full-blown one by Season 4.
Broken Pedestal: In season 3, she finally realizes who Frank really is and starts to distance herself from him. By Season 4, she hardly acknowledges his existence.
Chekhov's Skill: A minor gag for several episodes in season three has her training herself to hold her breath underwater for long periods of time to combat a fear of being drowned at the pool, which Frank instilled in her. She later uses this ability to hold her bully under the water until the other girl passes out.
Double Standard: Rape, Female on Male: As with many cases of this trope on the show, it's mostly played for laughs when Debbie loses her virginity to an older boy she likes by raping him while he is passed-out drunk and she is underage. When she confides in Fiona and Lip about it later, both are more bemused by the story than anything, although some of Debbie's bitchy friends do seem genuinely outraged by what happened (albeit probably because they were looking for a reason to mock Debbie, more than anything else).
Lip: Deb, I think any boy would be very lucky to be raped by you.
Dramatically Missing the Point: Debbie spends a day learning from her teen mom friends that their lives are miserable. Derek disconnects his phone and goes to Florida to be away from her and their child. Finally, she loses the "flour baby" that she was using to prove to Fiona that she could be a responsible mother. Debbie still packs a bag to go to Florida.
Everyone's Baby Sister: In the first four seasons, she was this. Everyone was protective of her, and looked out for her well being. Hurting her was seen as a special kind of evil.
Generation Xerox: Much of her Season 8 arc sees Debbie juggling work, school, and new friends. Until after an exam when she does a very Monica thing, and packs baby Franny into the back of a car for an Ecstasy-fueled road trip to Joliet. By the Series Finale Frank outright says that she reminds him of Monica, and not in a complimentary way.
Girlish Pigtails: This seemed to be her preferred hairstyle in the early seasons.
Growing Up Sucks: A major plot point for her in season four.
Hates Being Alone: Each of the Gallagher children copes with their parental neglect in different ways, and this is how it manifests in Debbie. As a child she clings on to loving Frank and Monica even as she starts to realize how awful they are, and she goes to extreme lengths to attach herself to boyfriends Matty and Derek by raping one and becoming purposefully pregnant to the other. In the final season, she is the one most opposed to Lip selling the house and everybody going their separate ways because she can't bear the family not being together, and when she does start looking for somewhere she and her daughter Franny can live, she doesn't even consider Franny's request to have her own room, deciding that her five-year-old daughter needs to live in the same room as her.
Hero-Worshipper: As a child, she idolizes her father and hopes for him to come back to normal. Until Season 3's "The American Dream" where he carelessly wrecks a homework project she'd been working hard on. She still is more forgiving towards Frank than her other siblings are, particularly during Season 6 when he's the only family member who supports her decision to keep her pregnancy… but then it all gets wrecked again by the time Season 7 rolls around, especially when Frank attacks her while trying to find where she stashed Monica's meth.
Jerkass: Unfortunately, she majorly develops this around Season 5 at the earliest. She tricks her boyfriend into getting her pregnant, and she gradually becomes more and more violent.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: While her character does become worse as the show goes on, she makes it clear that she really cares about her siblings and Franny and will go above and beyond for them.
Karma Houdini Warranty: Gets away scotch free for the rape of Matty, come some season later and she actually get arrested and sentenced for statutory rape when Claudia finds out she has been sleeping with Julia, despite the age difference are in months and a much more voluntary act.
Kavorka Man: A rare gender-swapped variant. Debbie is no beauty like Fiona and tends to be a bit dorky, but her boyfriends have all been very attractive.
Lipstick Lesbian: She later identifies as a lesbian and presents more femininely than not.
Love Makes You Crazy: Develops her first major crush with Matty, who only wants to be friends due to her young age. After her Operation: Jealousy backfires, she starts harassing a girl Matty is seeing, complete with anonymous threats over the phone and leaving a snake in her car.
Love Makes You Stupid: So blinded by her feelings and influenced by her equally young and sexually active friends that she fails to see or understand why Matty (who is 20) would turn down a sexual relationship with a girl who is barely 13. Like most teenagers with their first crush, she also Took a Level in Dumbass and loses a lot of what made her Wise Beyond Her Years.
Mama Bear: Season 7 sees her ready to outright kill her daughter's grandmother and aunt after they take Franny away from her.
Minor Living Alone: There are other people in the house sometimes, but after Sammi leaves and Carl goes to juvie, Debbie and Liam are the only permanent residents of the Gallagher house.
Morality Pet: In the early seasons she was this to pretty much everyone.
Nice Girl: She was this in the three first seasons, until season 4 she becomes meaner, but it doesn't mean she's heartless.
No Bisexuals: After having multiple boyfriends, Debbie ultimately comes to the realization that she is a lesbian and begins dating a woman in Season 11.
No Periods, Period: Averted in Season 4, when she has her first one.
The Pollyanna: Although seems to be subverted as of Season 4.
Odd Friendship:
She develops this with Mandy in Season 3, after Mandy teaches her "Milkovich style" self-defense. Mandy also serves as a sort of Big Sister Mentor in Season 4 when Fiona's too busy with her new job to pay attention to Debbie, especially when Debbie starts reaching sexual maturity.
Also, with Sheila Jackson. Perhaps because she reminds her of Karen as a child, when she was young and innocent. Sheila often trusts Debbie with the care of her house or her plants, and would often stay with Carl and her in Season 4 when Fiona was working.
Operation: Jealousy: She tries to make ex-"boyfriend" Matty jealous and want to date her again by lying about having other dates, which backfires when Matty returns with a (real) date of his own.
Pet the Dog: In season 4, despite the fact that she Took a Level in Jerkass, she still does Sheila the favour of watering her plants and treats her better than the the other characters. She has numerous other Pet the Dog moments throughout the show that make her a Jerk with a Heart of Gold.
Redheads Are Uncool: Although her half-brother Ian is also a redhead and seems much cooler, at least in the early seasons, Debbie was a firm believer in this.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Her former love interests were Matty and Derek, who are good guys.
Stepford Smiler: No matter how horrible Frank and Monica treated her, no matter how much she or her family suffer, she always tries to smile so that others are not concerned about her.
Teen Pregnancy: She lies to her boyfriend Derek about being on birth control in Season 5 in an attempt to get herself pregnant. It works, and she gives birth to a baby daughter in the latter half of Season 6, when she was 15 years old.
Token Evil Teammate: She takes over the role from Carl. As Carl starts to seriously develop a conscience around Season 6 when he comes back from juvie, Debbie quickly loses hers by the end of season 5 as she becomes obsessed with getting pregnant plus more and more manipulative and unlikeable.
Like Carl, she starts to get better as she gets older and becomes the Gallagher most capable of taking over Fiona's role.
Took a Level in Dumbass: While she still displays some serious cunning and enough book-smarts to pass her GED in just one hour, Debbie's general common sense and maturity has taken some serious hits ever since she became pregnant near the end of Season 5.
Took a Level in Jerkass: She hits this majorly in Season 4, coinciding with her hitting puberty and becoming a Bratty Teenage Daughter. Debbie hits it again in Season 7 as her maternal demands turn her into a Jerkass.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: She originally was The Pollyanna but has become a Bratty Teenage Daughter and probably the most cynical of them all.
Wise Beyond Their Years:
Her maturity and responsibility are a running gag. She even gets a stress rash at one point from running a daycare at the house. At one point in the first season, she says to Carl, "You're 9, you need to start pulling your weight."
This begins to falter after hitting puberty and becoming obsessed with losing her virginity, leading her to act like a petty Jerkass over Matty. By the end of Season 5, she intentionally gets pregnant despite being very young.
Wrench Wench: In later seasons, she develops an aptitude for trades work: welding, plumbing, carpentry, household repairs, etc..
Yandere: Goaded on by Mandy, she launches a harassment scheme against a girl who Matty is dating, leaving a snake in her car and leaving a note saying that the next one will be venomous if she doesn't leave Matty alone. This backfires when said girl launches an equally vicious scheme of her own.