The Alcoholic: He's always hit the booze pretty hard, having had his first drink when he was only ten. In Season 6, Lip transitions from hard-partying adolescent to a full-blown alcoholic, and it has some pretty severe consequences. Season 7 sees him attending AA and falling on and off the wagon.
Affectionate Nickname: Nearly everyone calls him Lip.
Badass Bookworm: Solves more of his problems with violence than with his intelligence.
Berserk Button: Much like the rest of the Gallaghers, he really doesn't like his father and is usually the first one to attack him whenever he screws up or hurts someone.
Big Brother Instinct: He's fiercely protective of his younger siblings.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Though incredibly smart, his poor parental role models plus drug and alcohol use have meant he's often not motivated to fully take advantage of his skills. Indeed, he was fine with coasting by in life, with Mandy being the one to apply to colleges on his behalf to help him realize his potential. Once he starts going to college in Season 4, he quickly finds the workload to be a massive shock compared to high school, which he coasted through without a great deal of effort.
Chick Magnet: And boy does he get the crazy ones.
Commitment Issues: Mandy and Karen (at least for season one in Karen's case) want to be in a committed relationship with Lip, but he doesn't and is openly disturbed by Mandy semi-moving in and doing his laundry.
Crazy Jealous Guy: Though he was jealous of Jody, the "crazy" doesn't come up until he starts seeing Helene. He assaults her son (thinking that he's also a paramour) and comes to her house after they break up, drunkenly demanding for her to come out and talk to him, not understanding that he's already put her career in jeopardy. Eventually, he even gets to the point where he can't even get aroused unless he's thinking of Helene. He gets better eventually, though.
Deadpan Snarker: In the grand Gallagher tradition.
Diabolical Mastermind: In training, he's very smart, and uses his know-how to steal credit cards and fake tests.
Didn't Think This Through: He’s stunned by Debbie revealing Liam has been preparing to live in the streets. But Debbie points out it was because of his intention to sell their house and told all of his siblings to prepare finding themselves their own places, failing to remember that Liam is only ten years old and is dependent on his older siblings for a roof over his head. This convinces him to adopt Liam, who happily accepts.
Everyone Has Standards: While Karen is mainly focused on the money when she and Lip search for a family to adopt their unborn child, Lip genuinely cares about the baby’s future. Unlike Karen’s selfish attitude, Lip warns the social worker about the dangers of placing the child in a bad home—mentioning abusive or alcoholic parents—and insists on finding a safe, loving environment for the baby.
Guile Hero: Whether this actually works out or not (it rarely does), this is what he sees himself as and strives to be.
He's Back!: After Lip's breakup with Helene, he can't get aroused even while living in a sorority unless he looks at a picture of her. It's after a very thorough foot massage by Queenie that he's shown in the stinger of the episode in a four-way with three sorority sisters.
Hot-Blooded: He has a very short temper that can cause him to explode into some really volatile, irrational rages.
I Am Not My Father: He really hates his father and really doesn't want to turn out like him, even though he likely will follow the same path. After several seasons where he's clearly living his life in the exact opposite way as Frank would (working his ass off in both college and part-time jobs, contributing to the family back home as much as he can, working towards a long-term career), Season 6 sees him at serious risk of turning into his dad. Not only is he developing a drinking problem that could rival Frank's, complete with embarrassing, bridge-burning blackouts and waking up in a hospital, but after being caught smashing up several cars in a drunken rage by campus security, and being expelled, his education is in serious danger as well. The finale of the show has him border on Generation Xerox as he flunked out of college, is romantically involved with a slightly unhinged blonde (though Tami is considerably more responsible than Monica), is a young father and is financially lost, though Frank believes "he'll figure it out".
Insufferable Genius: He's all too aware of his high intelligence and considers himself to be superior to most other people because of it. At one point he tells Fiona, who has spent many years working herself to the bone at various minimum wage jobs to support the entire family, that because he's smarter than her he will inevitably end up with a much better job and will be able to support the family in ways she never could. She doesn't take this well.
Jerkass: To people who aren't close to him in particular, he's a bellicose, self serving, smart-ass. But in truth he really is a…
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Fundamentally a very good and caring person, despite how abrasive he can be at times. Note how when he and Karen are finding potential adoptive parents for Karen's baby, she only cares about the money involved while he genuinely tries to find a good family, even though a few episodes earlier, he wanted her to get an abortion. The episode in which he and Mandy take in Mandy's little half-sister at his place also makes this particularly noticeable.
Jerkass Has a Point: On occasions. In particular, in Season 4 after Liam nearly dies, he's a passive-aggressive jerk to Fiona, but can you blame him for being angry at Fiona almost letting their baby brother die? He also tells Fiona point blank that she is guilty and if she goes to trial she will go to jail for years.
Knight Templar Big Brother: He searches for pedophiles in the neighborhood after someone jerked off in front of Debbie on the bus. Upon finding one, he gathers men from the neighborhood and they go to beat them up. And when most of them disperse upon learning they're an attractive woman, he's the only one who suggests they still do something about her. Mandy does.
Ladykiller in Love: After countless romantic conquests, he seems to have become committed to Tami.
Law of Inverse Fertility: Tami reveals in the series finale that she's pregnant again. Lip works as a delivery boy and is struggling to find a house for his family. Still, he's mostly happy by the news.
Likes Older Women: Usually hooks up with women around his age, but in Season 5, he starts sleeping with his attractive older professor, who has a son his own age.
Love Martyr: For Karen, his dedication to her and what he thought was his child drove him to do some really stupid and asinine things.
Only Sane Man: With the exception of Season 2. And Season 6, where a successive series of events – his affair with Helene ending, being kicked out of his dorm, being kicked out of his replacement accommodations, plus his rapidly growing alcoholism and the general sense that unappreciated by his superiors – see him seriously losing the plot.
Off the Wagon: After making a genuine effort to stay (mostly) sober during the first half of Season 7, losing his appeal to get back into college and his break-up with Sierra sees him fully relapse. He sobers up again by the end of the season, and starts attending AA regularly.
Promotion to Parent: Lip has generally been the surrogate father figure to the younger siblings alongside Fiona's surrogate mother role. In Season 4, he has to step up to the plate fully after Fiona went off the rails. In the series finale, Lip, upon realizing that Liam would be at risk of being homeless once the house is sold, takes Liam in to live with him, Tami, and Fred.
Really Gets Around: He sleeps with a lot of women over the course of the series.
Rejected Apology: He firmly refuses to accept any apologies from Monica and any attempts at reconciliation.
Save You From Becoming Your Parent: Unlike Frank, he finished high school and gets into college (partly thanks to Mandy though). The drunken benders and Frank-like ranting in Season 6 show that the apple hasn't fallen far from the tree, though. One scene in Season 7 shows him waking up on a train from a drunken stupor, and the resemblance to Frank is uncanny. Debbie even tells Lip that she doesn't want him to end up like Frank. For all of Lip's flaws, at the very least he's not going to be as terrible a father as Frank; plus Tami keeps Lip in line in contrast to Monica, who did the opposite for Frank.
The Slacker: He'd rather not live up to his responsibilities. Though he's brilliant, he doesn't like to take tests unless he's being paid to take someone else's.
Small Name, Big Ego: Bites him hard when he goes to college. He expects to be able to coast by on minimal effort like he did in high school, but he can barely manage a D average. When a teachers assistant tells him his paper sucked and offered no original insights he immediately makes an excuse and tries to imply the prof would have graded him better, the TA tells him how easily he saw through Lips tricks and bullshit and could tell he expected nobody to notice, before suggesting he take a less challenging course if he's not going to work harder. Later he brags to another student waiting for the tutoring session (who turns out to be the tutor) about how he intends to scam the tutor into giving him extra credit without working for it, then tries to invite said tutor(a hot blonde senior) to go to a party with him at what turns out to be her sorority, and as soon as he sees her at the party he fully expects her to want to take him back to her apartment, at which she laughs him off and makes it clear she's interested in a handsome pre med. Then when he runs into an older girl from his neighborhood at the same party he tells her his planned hook up failed and he assumes she'll want to ditch the party to go hook up with him.
Girl: (to Lip after he asks her to go hook up) Wow, so you think just because you were some hot shit back home with that hood rat attitude it's gonna work here? Fuck you. You're the kind of guy I went to college to get away from.
The Smart Guy: He's extremely smart, but he doesn't fully embrace it because to him (and everyone else), Gallaghers don't succeed.
The Stoner: He indulges in a joint or three pretty regularly.
Lip: (to Ian, after the latter asks if he has any ecstasy) You know that I've always preferred carcinogens over stimulants.
Token Evil Teammate: He shares this role with Debbie and Carl at different points in the series. Lip is easily one of the more amoral and self serving of the Gallaghers: from stalking Karen after she dumps him, to ignoring Mandy's feelings at every turn, to demanding the family sell the Gallagher house despite not living in it and Debbie, Carl and Liam still living there, to stealing from his former place of work to satiate his ego despite promising Tami to stop committing crime for Fred's sake.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Lip gets more hostile in Season 7, where he seems almost annoyed that his family is finding success and he isn't.