Adaptational Heroism: In the book, Boromir, from the beginning, had no plans to actually escort the Ring to Mordor; rather, he means to return home with Aragorn, and that happens to be taking more or less the same road for a lot of its length. In the films, while he makes a similar plea for the Ring to be brought to Gondor as a weapon (until it is denied by Aragorn and Gandalf), it is suggested that Boromir was indeed up for taking Frodo all the way to Mordor (or at least making sure they swung by Minas Tirith on the way) until the Ring got its claws in him.
Boromir: If this is indeed the will of the council, then Gondor will see it done.
Annoying Arrows: Subverted, akin to the book. It takes three arrows to bring Boromir down, but Lurtz kills him in the end.
Anti-Hero: The most stand-out example in the entire film trilogy (Gollum, the other noteworthy grey character of the films, ends up failing to achieve redemption). Boromir is a genuinely good man with the understandable motivation of wishing to save his people, but the Ring and his father's orders drive him to become what finally breaks a fracturing Fellowship.
The Atoner: Horrified by how his actions have driven Frodo away, he makes a Last Stand against dozens of Uruk-Hai to defend Merry and Pippin, ultimately dying while protecting them.
Badass Normal: Aside from being the son of the Steward, Boromir has no special bloodline or vague mysticism about him like Aragorn. He's a fairly normal man mixed in with a bunch of fantasy archetypes. That said, he's a great fighter and even a hail of arrows can't stop him ...at first.
Big Brother Instinct: He's very quick to defend Faramir from their father's cruel detractions and shows his brother open affection whenever possible. Faramir's visible devastation at learning of his brother's death says a lot about their relationship. He also develops this for Merry and Pippin over the course of the first movie.
Boromir: You give him no credit and yet he tries to do your will! He loves you, Father.
Denethor: Do not trouble me with Faramir. I know his uses and they are few.
The Big Guy: Shares this role with Gimli. He's not only a fierce fighter using a sword and shield, but he's also quite hammy.
Boisterous Bruiser: In an Extended/deleted scene, we see him as the champion of Gondor, leading the army to victory and keeping his speech afterwards short so there's "more time for drinking." He's much less happy when he's around the Ring, or his father.
Broken Ace: He was a proud, gallant warrior, but the pressure put on him by his father eroded his common sense, and he never thought Sauron could be beaten, which fed his obsession with the Ring.
Calling the Old Man Out: His father Denethor holds him as the clear favorite between him and his brother Faramir, but a flashback scene in the Extended Edition of Two Towers shows that Boromir hates being the favorite and doesn't hesitate to call out his father for his mistreatment of his little brother.
Cool Big Bro: Takes on this role for Merry and Pippin during their sword training. He's also first to defend them from the Uruk-hai, but gets killed in the process. He's also one to his actual brother Faramir, defending him from their father's harsh treatment of him.
The Corruptible: While he is the most susceptible of the Fellowship to the Ring's corruption due to being a mortal Man, he is good and honorable. In fact, it's even implied that the main reason the Ring got him in the first place was because he was too good and honorable. He wants to save his people and uphold his duty to them so much that the Ring used it to influence him. After succumbing to the Ring's influence, he becomes horrified enough that he atones for his actions by defending Merry and Pippin from the Uruk-hai to his death.
The Dark Side Will Make You Forget: The Extended Edition of The Two Towers reveals that Boromir was well aware that the Ring is a cursed object that couldn't be wielded by Men and would corrupt any who tried. As soon as he sees the Ring, Boromir can think only of wielding its power.
Defiant to the End: When Lurtz is about to deliver the coup de grace, Boromir, while on his knees from three arrows in the chest, looks him dead in the eye as he waits for the Uruk to get it over with.
The Determinator: You could pretty much rename this trope 'The Boromir' and it would still be accurate, such as when he takes multiple arrows to the chest and keeps fighting.
Dies Differently in Adaptation: Downplayed, he is shot with arrows all the same, but the books indicate it was more than three arrows ("many") and it's implied he tore the first ones out to keep fighting, as Pippin last sees him doing so.
Draw Aggro: He blows the Horn of Gondor as he defends Merry and Pippin, which not only draws the rest of the Fellowship to him, but also all the Uruks, in doing so drawing them away from Frodo - much like how Merry and Pippin had been trying to do. It also draws the orcs away from Legolas, Gimli and Aragorn, giving them a reprieve and allowing Legolas to save Aragorn from an orc that was choking him.
Dying Moment of Awesome: No matter how many arrows are shot into him, he does not give up trying to save Merry and Pippin.
Establishing Character Moment: Boromir instantly suggesting the Ring be turned over to Gondor to use against Sauron at the Council of Elrond. In this scene he clearly shows his pride, his mild audacity, and his genuine concern for protecting his people — and how unfortunately, the latter trait does not cancel out the former two so much as fuel them.
Face Death with Dignity: In his last moments with Aragorn before succumbing to his wounds, Boromir had initially fallen into despair over his failure to protect Merry and Pippin, his failure to resist the Ring's influence, and his belief that, with his death, Gondor would fall and Men were doomed. But Aragorn reassures him that he has kept his honor and that he would do everything he could to make sure that Gondor would never fall. This allows Boromir to regain his resolve and even tell Aragorn that he would have been proud to recognize him as his king (whereas before he was dismissive of the idea of Aragorn being Isildur's heir.)
Fallen Hero: He was a valiant warrior—his people's champion—trying to save his country but he couldn't resist the temptation of the Ring.
Fantastic Racism: Coming from Gondor, who had to fend for themselves, he holds great disregard for both Elves and Dwarves while also considering Aragorn unworthy of leadership. He eventually comes around by the end of the first film.
Foreshadowing:
In the extended cut, he's the only person after Gandalf speaks the black speech that doesn't drop the subject of using the Ring against Sauron, hinting that the topic will come up again.
Boromir is the only member of the Fellowship to not initially swear to help Frodo, instead making a vague statement about Gondor "see(ing) it done". This indicates to the viewer that he doesn't have the same desire to destroy the Ring like the others.
Remember that brief moment where Aragorn sees that Boromir has left his shield behind when they first make bank at Rauros Falls? Probably would've been better if he had remembered.
Those two arrows he narrowly dodges right before the battle in Balin's tomb certainly herald things to come.
Four-Star Badass: Captain-General of the armies of Gondor, and a fierce and skilled warrior. It takes over a dozen Uruk-hai and an archer swarming him as he tries to defend Merry and Pippin to finally fell him.
Heroes Prefer Swords: Wields a sword, and shield, and he is a heroic defender of men and hobbits.
Jerkass Has a Point: While his prickliness towards Aragorn, the Elves, and his lack of faith in the quest are his greatest flaws, Boromir's attitude is rooted in the fact that the Gondorians have been skirmishing with Mordor for centuries, while the Elves, Dwarves, and Rangers have apparently been sitting on the sidelines. His Vitriolic Best Buds relationship with Aragorn, while never openly hostile, is rooted in Boromir seeing the former as having sat out the conflict (and being hesitant to take his place in the world of Men) while Boromir's family and people have been struggling and dying for some time. Aragorn initially disagrees with him, but realizes Boromir had a point, and decides to do his best to defend Gondor.
Jerkass to One: Out of the whole Fellowship, the only one he treats somewhat hostile is Aragorn, due to being frustrated with the latter's lack of will to join and fight for his people.
Killed Off for Real: The only Fellowship member to remain dead and never come back.
The Lancer: To Aragorn, both being noble descendants of Gondor but with contrasting attitudes and views of their heritage. The fact that he's been a jerk to him in the first film doesn't help, either. His fighting style's also a bit clunkier compared to Aragorn's more elegant swordplay.
Made of Iron: He is a normal man, no mystical powers to him. Yet during the fight with the cave-troll in Moria, he and Aragorn grab its chain to force it away from Sam. However, the troll soon realizes this, yanks its own chain while Boromir is still holding onto it, and whips him into the opposite wall. This is an action that would've killed most men or at least broken a few bones, yet Boromir is only disoriented by the blow and the most danger he's in is not being able to react in time to an opportunistic orc that Aragorn has to save him via Throwing Your Sword Always Works.
And let's not forget his heroics at Amon Hen. It took three arrows from Lurtz to fell him. Though the first two arrows might not necessarily have been fatal (they struck him just under the collarbone and just above his waistline, whereas the third arrow likely pierced him in the lung) he still got up and continued to fight after both of them despite the fact that he was likely in excruciating pain.
Manly Tears: As he dies, no less. He sheds some earlier after realizing he has tried to seize the Ring from Frodo.
Master Swordsman: He's not as elegant as Aragorn, being more forceful and brutish, but he's not far behind in skill. Years of defending Gondor's borders no doubt contributed.
My God, What Have I Done?: Says it almost word for word after realizing that he tried taking the Ring from Frodo by force, realizing he had fallen to it's corruption. It motivates him to defend Merry and Pippin.
Nice Guy:
While he's rather prickly towards Aragorn, he's far more supportive of the Hobbits' inclusion in the party, while everyone else (including Aragorn) seems to considers them The Load at first. Not only does he teach Merry and Pippin how to fight, but in the aftermath of Moria and Gandalf's death, he has this to say when Aragorn pushes the devastated Fellowship to keep moving:
Boromir: Give them a moment, for pity's sake!
He's also the only member of the Fellowship to directly try to comfort Frodo after Gandalf's death.
Boromir: Gandalf's death was not in vain...
Subtle, but he's also the only member to comfort Gimli in Moria. He puts his hand on Gimli's shoulder as he mourns his cousin, and is seen visibly restraining an upset Gimli once they make it outside.
He's also shown to have a very good relationship with his younger brother, who is routinely dismissed or outright ridiculed by their father. When Denethor describes Faramir as being useless, Boromir is visibly angered and doesn't hesitate to come to his brother's defense. He's quite willing to hug and display open affection to Faramir as well.
While passing through Caradhras, Boromir implores Gandalf to turn around because the freezing cold and heavy winds will be the death of the Hobbits. Granted, this was so they would pass through the Gap of Rohan, and therefore be closer to Gondor, but he's the only one who actively points out the Hobbits simply cannot survive the pass.
Even when visibly dying from his wounds, the first thing he does is beseech Aragorn to save Merry and Pippin, whom he'd grown very fond of. In fact, it's even implied that the only reason he was still fighting, despite already being riddled with arrows, was to keep them safe.
Boromir: They took the little ones!
Not Himself: As Frodo points out during their confrontation, Boromir is visibly obsessed with stealing the Ring in order to bring it back to Gondor and use it as a weapon. He even curses the Hobbits when he was all but nice to them the whole journey up until that point. Needless to say, Boromir is remorseful when Frodo escapes with the Ring.
One-Man Army: He takes on dozens of Uruk-hai and carves through them with only minimal outside help from Merry and Pippin. Were it not for Lurtz and his arrows, he might have even won, or at least successfully held out until Aragorn and the others arrived.
Parental Favoritism: He's clearly Denethor's favorite, but Boromir absolutely hates being the favorite and his father's tendency to act dismissive of and find fault in everything Faramir does.
Posthumous Character: Even though he dies early on, his background and character is explored by the other characters. It also has a major influence on the plot, with both Denethor and Faramir being strongly affected by Boromir's death.
Redemption Equals Death: After trying to take the One Ring (under the Ring's influence, no less), he dies defending Merry and Pippin from the Uruk-hai.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red to Aragorn and Faramir's Blue, being more of a glorified warrior whose goal is to protect his people. His Two Blue Onis, while sharing his desire to protect Gondor, are more reserved about it and are smart enough to know the Ring cannot be used against the Enemy.
Royals Who Actually Do Something: While he's technically the son of the Steward of Gondor and not actually royal, Boromir is one of Middle-earth's fiercest fighters, which is why his father favors him over Faramir. He firmly believes that it's his duty to protect and save Gondor from the continued expansion of Mordor's influence.
Sanity Slippage: Happens gradually as his desire for the Ring slowly drives him mad until he finally snaps and attacks Frodo. He gets better though, for a short time.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man:
Interestingly, while Boromir may seem to be the manly man to Aragorn's sensitive guy due to his physical size and martial skill, he's actually the more sensitive of the two. He very quickly displays a Big Brother Instinct not only for Faramir but towards Merry and Pippin as well, and attempts to comfort Gimli in Moria and Frodo in Lorien after Gandalf's death. He also advocates for the group to have a moment to mourn. Notably, his doubts and sensitivities make him a prime target for the One Ring, as it exploits his desire to protect his people. The extended edition shows that when speaking to Aragorn privately, Boromir is the more emotional person of the two, trying to seemingly get Aragorn to open up, but also being quick to emotional outbursts. Also, after attempting to steal the One Ring, Boromir is immediately beside himself with grief and repentance.
On the other hand, he's definitely the manly man to Faramir's sensitive guy.
Sibling Yin-Yang: He's the polar opposite of his brother Faramir, who is also a capable warrior, but more bookish and reserved. Boromir's status as a captain and the hero of Gondor places him as more of The Heart, whereas Faramir's skill as a ranger aligns him more as The Smart Guy.
The Last Dance: He continues to slay more Uruk-hai to protect Merry and Pippin despite being shot at by Lurtz with two arrows already.
This Is Gonna Suck:
Sean Bean's delivery of the line "They have a cave troll" in the movie is all over this trope, complete with an exasperated scowl.
In the Extended Edition of The Two Towers, he has this reaction upon learning that Denethor has come to congratulate them for retaking Osgiliath. The fact that Faramir is standing right there with him doesn't help matters, especially since Boromir is quite aware of his father's dismissive and cruel nature.
Tragic Keepsake:
Aragorn takes Boromir's bracers, as memory of the man and his newfound duty to Gondor he swore to the dying Boromir.
His broken Horn of Gondor is found by Faramir, who returns it to their father, who keeps it.
Took a Level in Jerkass: When he comes across Frodo in the woods, his wish to have the Ring for himself corrupts him, therefore making him more aggressive towards the hobbit. He tries to steal the Ring off him by force, though fortunately, Frodo has the good sense to put it on, turn invisible, and escape. Once the Ring is away from him, Boromir quickly comes to his senses and feels remorse for his actions, all the way until his death.
Tragic Hero: He dies at the end of the first film after the Ring influences him to take it for himself. Prior to this, he is shown obsessing over it since the meeting in Rivendell, and it is not at all helped by the fact that his father is the one who wants it in the first place. Moreover, it's not greed or lust for power that makes him desire the ring, but simply the need to protect his people.
Tsundere: Type B, with most of the tsun going to Aragorn. He's a pretty nice guy otherwise. Sadly, it's only right before his death that he warms up to Aragorn.
Untouchable Until Tagged: He was on a rip-roaring, Uruk-slaying binge until a single arrow hits him, which was enough to get him mobbed and killed, although it took another couple of arrows to fully incapacitate him. Granted, he was probably coursing through on pure adrenaline, but also because he was single-handedly trying to protect Merry and Pippin and hold off an entire slew of Orcs while waiting for Aragorn and the others to arrive.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Aragorn, who he initially dismisses as just another Ranger with an empty claim to the throne of Gondor. While their relationship is never outright hostile, there is a sense of antipathy between the two. When Aragorn promises Boromir that he will not let the world of Men fall, it marks Aragorn's acceptance of his legacy and responsibilities, and that he has finally aligned himself with his race. It's the first time Aragorn refers to the Gondorians as his people. Boromir then fully accepts Aragorn into the community by acknowledging him as his (Boromir's) captain and king.
Aragorn: ...I swear to you, I will not let the white city fall, nor our people fail.
Boromir: Our people? Our people. I would've followed you, my brother ... my captain ... my king.
Warrior Prince: While he's technically the son of the Steward of Gondor, that still makes him a prince in all but name, and he's fully dedicated to defending Gondor from the forces of Mordor.
Weapon Twirling: He twirls his sword a few times while waiting for the goblin horde to break into Balin's Tomb in Moria.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: Boromir's desires for the Ring are purely motivated by his wanting to use it to defend the people of Gondor, despite everyone else in the Fellowship constantly reminding him that the Ring could never be used for good. Unfortunately, it's Boromir's strong convictions that he could still use it for good that allows the Ring to prey on him and slowly start to turn his mind.