Accidental Hero: Ultimately he's trying to take the Ring back from Gollum for himself, when he accidently causes Gollum and the Ring to fall in the lava.
Action Survivor: Due to Frodo's Adaptational Wimp, he ends up as this but despite not contributing to fighting as much as some of the other characters, he still fights back and manages to get through it unscathed.
All Webbed Up: This happens to Frodo after he manages to escape from Shelob's lair.
Badass Normal: Just like his uncle before him, Frodo's an ordinary hobbit who's thrust into extraordinary circumstances that end up changing his once-peaceful and boring life forever. Downplayed in that he never engages in any major fights outside of his confrontations with Gollum.
Break the Cutie: Getting stabbed by the Witch-King curses Frodo with lifelong pain, which was considered the best-case scenario considering he would have become a wraith if not for the healing powers of the elves in Rivendell. The Ring's Corrupting Influence also starts to take effect the closer he gets to Mordor and leaves him wracked with guilt when he starts alienating Sam. He does not get better until he leaves for the Undying Lands with Gandalf in hopes of finding a better life there.
But Now I Must Go: Ultimately, unable to recover from the ordeal of his time as a Ringbearer, Frodo leaves Middle-earth alongside Gandalf and Bilbo to the Undying Lands.
The Chosen One: Frodo is THE Chosen One of the series. He inherited Sauron's Ring from Bilbo Baggins and is the one meant to destroy it in the fires of Mount Doom.
Gandalf: There are other forces at work in this world besides the will of evil. Bilbo was meant to find the Ring. In which case you were also meant to have it. And that is an encouraging thought.
Classical Anti-Hero: He does have insecurities and issues to deal with, but he's always a kindhearted, noble and heroic young man at the end of the day.
Cool Sword: Sting, an elven long knife that glows when orcs are nearby. It was given to him by Bilbo, who acquired it during his quest 60 years prior to reclaim the Lonely Mountain.
The Corruption: One of the major themes of the story is how he struggles against the Ring's dark influence, which gets stronger the closer he gets to Mordor. Cut images from The Two Towers show what would have happened if he had kept the Ring, portraying his transformation into a creature similar to Gollum.
Damsel out of Distress: Gender-inverted. When dealing with the Ring-crazed Boromir, he rescues himself by slipping on the Ring to become invisible and shoving Boromir away. In the film, he even gets in a couple of hits before he runs off.
Deadpan Snarker: Not to the extent as Merry or Sam, but he can snark with the best of them when the mood takes him. More evident in the extended editions, though.
Frodo: Don't worry, Sam. Rosie knows an idiot when she sees one.
Determinator: Poor Frodo goes through absolute hell (with Sam at his side) to destroy the Ring and kick Sauron out of Middle-earth for good.
Distressed Dude: Frodo gets attacked and captured more times than any other member of the Fellowship. Justified in that he's carrying the One Ring all their enemies are after.
Dressing as the Enemy: He and Sam disguise themselves as orcs during the last leg of their journey.
Driven to Suicide: The look we see in his eyes as he hangs over the edge, feeling all too tempted to give into despair. Thankfully, through Sam's loyalty and love, Frodo grabs his hand and subverts this trope.
Early-Bird Cameo: In the flash-forward beginning of The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey.
Failure Hero: Subverted. It seems he's going to be this once he falls victim to the Ring's corruption, but he ends up saving the day anyway albeit in an Accidental Hero sort of way.
Fingore: Gets his finger chewed off by Gollum in a desperate attempt to get the One Ring.
Freudian Trio: With Sam and Gollum; Frodo represents the Ego. He puts up as much resistance to the Ring as he can, but he's not immune to its corruption.
The Gadfly: He shoves Sam into Rosie's path at Bilbo's birthday after he chickens out of asking her to dance, then cackles like a maniac at the sight of them dancing.
Geek Physiques: He's the most bookish of the Hobbits and has a slender physique.
Good Is Not Soft: Despite his gentle, merciful personality, he threatens Gollum with Sting when the latter tries an ambush and almost chokes Sam to death.
Frodo: Release him, or I'll cut your throat!
Guile Hero: Frodo may not be an Action Hero like Aragorn, but he manages to make it to Mount Doom in large part due to his wits and avoiding straight up fights and confrontations. Case in point, when disguised as orcs and when their cover is about to be blown, Frodo instructs Sam to beat him up to cause a distraction and cause an uproar. He's also the one who solves the riddle in Moria and keeps Sam from being caught when falling down the hill.
Happily Adopted: Frodo was adopted by his uncle Bilbo several years after his parents drowned in the Brandywine River. Uncle and nephew are shown to have a very close and loving relationship, with Bilbo doting on Frodo at every opportunity and then appointing him as his official heir to Bag End.
Heroic BSoD: He goes silent after Gandalf falls fighting the Balrog in Moria.
Heroic Willpower: It's underplayed in the films, but Frodo spends years under the Ring's influence. Nevertheless, he's able to (with assistance) bring it to the heart of Mordor, and falters only once he has the Ring literally dangling over the lava (whereas many others would have failed far sooner and never brought it anywhere near Mount Doom). As no mortal could have resisted the Ring in that place, Frodo, through sheer force of will, brings the Ring as close to destruction as is physically possible for a mortal acting alone.
The Hero's Journey: Frodo sets off from the Shire to accomplish a mission given to him by Gandalf, and despite being given the option to head back home, he decides to keep going with the mission. He succeeds in his quest to get the One Ring to Mount Doom and though he succumbs to its corruption, he still destroys it albeit accidentally. Unfortunately, he can't recover from the physical and mental injuries he succumbed through his journey due to the Ring's influence and more, leading to him not being able to return to the Shire, as he ends up going with Gandalf to the Undying Lands as a reward. Thankfully, he seems to be content despite this trauma, given the smile he gives to his friends as he leaves.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Sam as they trekked to Mordor. It's implied that they've known each other for years.
Hidden Depths: This applies to all the hobbits, but Frodo in particular is very well-educated thanks to his uncle's careful and extensive instruction on a wide range of subjects.
Hitchhiker Heroes: He and Sam are this as they trek towards Mordor.
I Just Want to Be Normal: Laments that he wished the Ring had never come to him at one point (before he's anywhere near his darkest hour), prompting Gandalf to respond that all who live to see such times wish this, and that all any of them can do is decide what to do with the time that is given to him.
Innocent Blue Eyes: He has huge, expressive, very blue eyes, which suggest the innocence and good-heartedness of him and hobbits in general (although his eyes aren't blue in the book). They also contrast against the gigantic fireball that is the Eye of Sauron.
It Sucks to Be the Chosen One: Frodo is chosen to bear the One Ring, which unfortunately has a will of its own: it wants to go back to its true master and will corrupt anyone who possesses (or even gets near) it to advance its goal. This ends up being the reason why Frodo (almost) fails in his Quest, and has to leave Middle-earth in the end due to the psychological damage he has endured. This is not even going into the physical damage he takes during the quest.
Interclass Friendship: Frodo is a gentlehobbit; Sam is his gardener. The two are still on good terms and become even closer over the course of the journey thanks to all the things they have to endure together.
Interspecies Friendship: With Gandalf, who he is the closest to even when they're both part of the Fellowship and goes silent when Gandalf falls fighting the Balrog. They eventually sail out to the West together after everything is over.
Kubrick Stare:
When the One Ring finally corrupts him and he claims it for himself, he stares at Sam for only an instant before putting the Ring on and vanishing.
He has an earlier one when the Nazgul terrorize Osgiliath, ominously murmuring "they're here".
The Leader: Acts as this for the other Hobbits during the first half of The Fellowship of the Ring while on the run from the Ringwraiths. Justified in for several reasons: he's the one of highest social rank (Sam is his servant while Merry and Pippin are younger and less experienced), and he's carrying the Ring, which is the whole reason for the trip.
Messianic Archetype: Though he differs from most in that he is flawed and fallible.
Moment of Weakness: When he decides to send Sam away in Return of the King. It isn't long after he does so as he's trying to find his way through Cirith Ungol that he realizes what a horrible mistake he made in doing so.
Morality Pet: Has several as he falls into the Ring's influence. Sam is the most obvious one, but in the very beginning the other members of the Fellowship fell into this role as well. Interestingly enough, Gollum of all people becomes one for him, but for a more interesting reason: seeing what Gollum has become and believing that both he and himself could one day be saved from what the Ring has done to them spurs him to reject its influence at times.
More Hero than Thou: He attempts to abandon all the rest so he doesn't drag them into danger, and almost succeeds entirely. He also refuses to let Sam carry the Ring, saying it would destroy him.
My God, What Have I Done?: He has a couple moments of this: first when he is talked down by Sam after threatening him while under the Ring's influence; he has another one when he is betrayed by Gollum in Shelob's cave, and realizes his horrible mistake in sending Sam away. Finally, in Mount Doom, after he fails to destroy the Ring, instead knocking Gollum off the ledge by accident in the scuffle to possess it. The look he gives Sam makes it clear that he's deeply saddened by what he did.
My Girl Back Home: Well, uncle. Bilbo stays behind in Rivendell to finish his tale while Frodo takes off for Mordor.
Named Weapons: He uses an elven dagger named Sting.
Nice Guy: His genuine kindness is what truly motivates him, and despite some shortcomings and insecurities, he ultimately remains noble and heroic.
Nightmare Face:
He begins to channel scary expressions as the Ring starts digging its claws into him. Over the course of the second and third film, we see him gain tired, red bags under his eyes and his skin turn a deathly pale color. During a fight with Sam, we see Frodo display a frenzied, almost feral, look in his eyes and begin to snarl in an all-too-familiar way...
The Psychotic Smirk that Frodo displays when he finally submits to the Ring. Similar to the flashback with Isildur in film one.
Not Himself: He gets more angry and paranoid the longer he has the Ring.
Older Than They Look: Despite being played by the youthful Elijah Wood (who was only 20 at the time), Frodo is actually 33. However, 33 Hobbit years is actually equivalent to a regular human's 21, so Wood wasn't too far off the mark. The average life expectancy for Hobbits is 100 years, and a few have been known to reach 120. The book gives both Frodo and Bilbo extended lives as a result of the Ring's power, although it's more being kept in a kind of stasis - they aren't getting more life, but rather what they have is being stretched out. It seems to be part of the Ring's power of corruption.
Parental Abandonment: His parents drowned in the Brandywine River. This gets a lot less attention than it does in the books, but elements of it remain.
The Power of Friendship: Sam's loyalty is one of the few things that keeps Frodo going throughout the second and third film.
Pretty Boy: He's young and beautiful (and played by Elijah Wood); in the books, hobbits are more pleasant-looking than beautiful, though Frodo is described as being very good-looking for a hobbit.
The Redeemer: Subverted. This side of his relationship towards Gollum is explored more thoroughly in this version of the story with Frodo out-right telling Sam that he hopes to bring back Gollum's former good self and actually comes within hairsbreath of success. Alas, The Forbidden Pool incident leads to the subversion occuring as a misunderstanding caused by Faramir's Rangers convinces Gollum to fully go through on the idea of betraying his Master.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Blue to Sam's Red. This especially comes to play in regards to treating Gollum, who Frodo grows fond of and has gradually come to trust, as he sees in Gollum what he would eventually become if the Ring were to take hold. This act of mercy would become an important factor in fulfilling the Quest.
Ring on a Necklace: As in the book, Frodo begins wearing the One Ring on a chain around his neck and tucked beneath his shirt part way through The Fellowship of the Ring, as carrying it around in his pocket isn't secure enough and he can't put it on for extended periods without alerting Sauron to its presence. As the Ring becomes heavier, the chain leaves some nasty-looking injuries around his neck.
Sanity Slippage: He falls more into the One Ring's influence the closer he and Sam get to Mordor.
Shipper on Deck: He's all for Sam/Rosie, to the point where he even forces Sam to dance with her during Bilbo's birthday party when Sam proves too shy to ask her to dance himself. Sam talking to her under his own willpower and later marrying her provokes some of the only smiles he gives after the quest.
Shirtless Captives: He is shirtless during his capture in Cirith Ungol's tower before Sam rescues him and they both don orc armor to pass the army unharmed. Justified in that the orcs needed to deliver his Mithril vest to Sauron, who then sends his messenger to deliver the vest to the awaiting Fellowship at the Black Gate as proof that Frodo died from being tortured.
The Smart Guy: He's the smartest of the hobbits, and is the one who solves the riddle in Moria after Gandalf fails to succeed. In addition, when traveling with Sam, he comes up with a plan on the spot to prevent the orcs from catching them.
Took a Level in Jerkass: To be fair, bearing the One Ring for a long time would do that to anyone. Just ask Gollum. He turns back to normal once the Ring is destroyed, but has severe psychological damage from the experience.
Turn the Other Cheek: He's merciful towards Gollum/Sméagol in spite of his past threatening Bilbo and even after Gollum betrays him in Shelob's lair.
Unlikely Hero: It's partly why he succeeds in getting to Mount Doom as he's beneath Sauron's notice.
You Can't Go Home Again: Frodo realizes at the end of his quest that he is irreversibly changed and ends up leaving Middle-earth forever as the result.