Actually Pretty Funny: Despite him promptly putting the two Hobbits to work cleaning the dishes as punishment for it, Gandalf's slight smile and stern but otherwise gentle tone when he busts Pippin and Merry for spectacularly setting off his dragon firework at Bilbo's birthday party — and then immediately trying to find another — indicates that he was more amused by them doing so than he lets on.
Gandalf: (tweaks the ash-covered Hobbits by an ear) Meriadoc Brandibuck and Peregrin Took. I might've known!
Afraid of Their Own Strength: Downplayed in that he's quite comfortable with his abilities as a Maia, but realizes that if someone as powerful as him were to possess the One Ring, the consequences would be disastrous. When Frodo offers it to him to keep it safe, Gandalf pleads with him not to even tempt him with the idea.
Badass Boast:
"I am a servant of the Secret Fire, wielder of the flame of Anor. The dark fire will not avail you, flame of Udûn! Go back to the shadow... YOU SHALL NOT PASS!"
"BILBO BAGGINS! Do not take me for a conjuror of cheap tricks!."
Badass Bookworm: Even being of the lesser Maiar, he was one of the wisest.
Badass in Distress: He's one of the powerful wizards who finds himself in sticky situations twice, and in most of the two film trilogies (especially The Hobbit) he usually does the rescuing.
Baritone of Strength: As a Maia, he's one of the most powerful beings in Middle-earth, and he acquits himself very well in combat. Ian McKellen portrays him with a fittingly deep, melodious voice.
Bearer of Bad News: Wormtongue names him 'Láthspell'; "ill news is an ill guest." Gandalf also gets the name "Stormcrow," for the same reason.
Beware the Nice Ones: While Gandalf is mostly a gentle, polite, and calm individual who doesn't mind using his powers for trivial things (e.g. setting off fireworks to make Hobbit children happy), he is definitely the farthest thing from a pushover.
In Fellowship of the Ring, after Bilbo has a sudden change of heart about passing the One Ring on to Frodo, Gandalf—still unaware of the Ring's true owner but knows deep down that it is dangerous—doesn't hesitate to raise his voice angrily, making the lights dim and his shadow grow intimidatingly in order to calm down Bilbo's immature outburst, making the later step away in fear, huddled against the wall, therefore making him submissive and helping him honor his promise to leave the Ring behind for good. After this, Gandalf mellows out quickly enough, and even gives his old friend two last hugs before Bilbo leaves for Rivendell.
Big Good: Gandalf is the main "power behind the scenes." Throughout The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, he is the one manipulating and directing events to help people resist Sauron, and makes sure—as much as he can—that they have the information and allies they need.
Broke Your Arm Punching Out Cthulhu: He dies from the Balrog ordeal. (Don't worry, he gets better.)
Brought Down to Badass: In terms of film-to-book comparisons. Gandalf doesn't sling as much magic as he does in the books (which is honestly still very infrequently outside of The Hobbit), but thanks to Glamdring and frequently using his staff as a secondary weapon, he remains one of the fiercest fighters in... about any action sequence he's in, often only second behind Aragorn. And then he comes back as Gandalf the White and gets even stronger.
But Now I Must Go: In The Hobbit, as well as the Fellowship of the Ring.
Came Back Strong: After fighting the Balrog and dying, he returns as Gandalf the White, the head of his Order.
Came Back Wrong: It's only momentarily noted, but Gandalf's not quite his usual self when Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli meet up with him, taking a moment to remember he's called Gandalf.
The Charmer: Rather surprisingly, he has shades of this in An Unexpected Journey with the Lady Galadriel. He certainly knows how to make her smile!
"Age may have changed me, but not so the Lady of Lórien."
The Chessmaster: He has been playing chess with Sauron over Middle-earth for centuries.
Cool Horse: After he becomes Gandalf the White, he rides Shadowfax, who is said to be the fastest and most beautiful horse in the world.
Cool Old Guy: To the hobbits, before they learn of his Hidden Depths.
Cool Sword: Glamdring, which he found during The Hobbit.
Crucified Hero Shot: A lot. First when Saruman telekinetically pins him to a wall; later when he falls into the abyss in Moria; and also in The Hobbit again when he confronts the Necromancer in Dol Guldur.
Damsel out of Distress: While he is held captive by Saruman in The Fellowship of the Ring, he calls an eagle to help him escape from Isengard.
Deadly Nosebleed: After his fight with the Balrog, his body is shown lying on the mountain peak with blood coming out of his nose.
Deadpan Snarker: Gandalf's temper is usually expressed through fairly harmless but snappy lines, such as telling Pippin to throw himself in the well to rid the Fellowship of his stupidity.
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: Old guy vs. Balrog, old guy wins. Gandalf is a Maia on the same level of the Balrog, but it's still impressive considering the size advantage that the Balrog had over him.
Distressed Dude: By the end of The Desolation of Smaug, he finds himself held captive in Dol Guldur after discovering the Necromancer's true identity as Sauron and has to be rescued in the next film by Galadriel, who is soon followed by the other members of the White Council.
Doting Parent: Towards the younger heroes and warriors in whatever band he's in at the time.
Dual Wielding: Wields both his staff and Glamdring at times.
Dying Moment of Awesome: Shouts "You Shall Not Pass!!" to the Balrog, and destroys the bridge to save the rest of the Fellowship. After a long and harrowing fall, Gandalf smites the Balrog, but his exhaustion and the physical strain of the deed ends up killing Gandalf.
Eccentric Mentor: To Bilbo and Frodo. He becomes less of it by the time he comes back as Gandalf the White.
Elemental Powers: He is the Keeper of Narya, the Ring of Fire. But instead of housing the literal kind, it's rather the kindling of the fire of the spirit, which spiritually and emotionally supports Gandalf on his centuries-long quest to bring about Sauron's downfall. Gandalf's original staff in The Hobbit possesses the similar spirit.
Erudite Stoner: The movies treat the hobbit pipeweed as a G-Rated Drug which turns Gandalf into this, especially in The Hobbit, where he at one point encourages Radagast to calm down by giving him a toke.
The Fettered: Per Word of God, he's not supposed to use his magic powers without good reason, but instead outwit the Enemy whenever he can.
Fire-Forged Friends: With Pippin, whom he didn't seem to like very much until their siege of Minas Tirith when they saved Faramir's life.
Forgot About His Powers: Sometimes he uses his magic powers and sometimes he doesn't, which is actually an inherited trait from the books. He does when battling Saruman, or when facing the Balrog, or when he scares off the Nazgûl that are chasing Faramir's men on the road to Minas Tirith, but at other times he seems to forget he's a wizard and is content simply to whack bad guys with his staff, most notably when he's fighting in hand-to-hand combat in the siege of Minas Tirith or in the final battle at the gate to Mordor. Ian McKellen even asked this question once.
McKellen: Why don't I zap them?
Jackson: (thinking quickly) ...ah, you see, the staff is out of batteries and the local alchemy shop is closed for the war.
Friend to All Children: When he arrives in Hobbiton at the beginning of Fellowship of the Ring, the hobbit children are delighted to see him and shout for him to set off fireworks; he happily obliges.
Good Counterpart: To Saruman, especially after Gandalf returns as the fresh White Wizard against the fallen White Wizard. Lampshaded in the extended edition of The Two Towers.
Legolas: Forgive me. I mistook you for Saruman.
Gandalf: I am Saruman. Or rather Saruman as he should have been.
Gasp of Life: He gasps for air after being resurrected as Gandalf the White.
Good Is Not Nice: Downplayed. He's a genuinely kind man at heart, but he can manipulative for heroic reasons, as well as a little cantankerous and grouchy, and whilst his bark is worse than his bite he is not above emitting a few growls from time to time and letting his reputation do the rest.
Good Is Not Soft: Beats up Denethor when the latter starts raving.
Good Smoking, Evil Smoking: When he's relaxing, he'll usually get out his pipe and start making smoke rings. Or smoke ships.
Grumpy Old Man: Lampshaded by Gimli when he comes back as Gandalf the White. "This new Gandalf's even grumpier than the old one!"
Harbinger of Impending Doom: Implied by his critics to be a menace who carries ill tiddings in his wake.
Heroic Sacrifice: Holds off the balrog in Moria to save the rest of the Fellowship.
Hero with Bad Publicity: Several areas of Middle-earth think poorly of him, seeing him as something that causes trouble. Frodo, for instance, says that he has been officially declared a "disrupter of the peace" in the Shire, and Wormtongue dubs him 'Láthspell'; "ill news is an ill guest." However, hobbit children adore him and even an adult has an Actually Pretty Funny reaction to him until his wife gives him a stare, and just as many people respect him.
Holy Hand Grenade: His powers also exhibit an explosive quality, as seen in An Unexpected Journey when he completely flattens the goblin horde with a deafening blast of white light, right before they are about to hack Thorin's head off.
Interspecies Friendship: He has many, but notably with the Hobbit Bilbo, Gwaihir (Lord of the Eagles), and the Elven Lady Galadriel.
Knight Templar: Defied. Wearing the One Ring would make him far worse than Sauron, while being convinced of his own righteousness, which is why he refuses to even touch the thing and puts it in Frodo's care instead.
Large Ham: He can be quite bombastic at times.
"The dark fire will not avail you, Flame of Udun! Go back to the shadow! You Shall Not Pass!!"
The Leader: For the Fellowship of the Ring. He also seems to take this role for the Men of Gondor as they face the armies of Mordor storming Minas Tirith.
Light 'em Up: Seems to be his main power, ranging from simple white light to illuminate his path, to protective light bubbles to sunlight manipulation. Predictably, it grows more powerful as he becomes Gandalf the White, capable of repelling freaking Nazgûl.
Light Is Good: Gandalf has a lot of light-related abilities, has white hair and clothing as Gandalf the White, and is the Big Good of the story.
Literal-Minded: He toys with this in The Hobbit, when he meets Bilbo and their conversation about the meaning of "good morning." However, it is revealed that Gandalf was doing it intentionally, partly to remind Bilbo of who he was and partly because it amused him to do so.
Magnetic Hero: After Denethor crosses the Despair Event Horizon, Gandalf knocks him unconscious with a good thwack on the head and assumes control of the army defending Minas Tirith. Nobody in the army contests this change in leadership, and they begin to fight back against Sauron's forces. Notably, Gondor holds out the entire night until the Rohirrim show up.
Manipulative Bastard: He's a heroic version of this, as it is his job to steer the Free People in the right direction to orchestrate Sauron's defeat, even if it means using friend and foe alike to achieve such ends.
Meaningful Name: Gandálfr (Anglicized to Gandalf) is an Old Norse name that means "wand-elf"; the men of Rhovanion called him as such because they confused him for an elf. Wand can also mean "sword"note , making this a heroic if somewhat threatening name.
The Mentor: He serves as a mentor figure for Frodo - and Bilbo before him - to help them grow, but he insists that he only nudges them out the door.
Mentor Occupational Hazard: Dies fighting the balrog, but he gets better.
Messianic Archetype: Died and came back three days later, wearing white robes? Yep.
Mind Over Matter: Can exert some limited telekinesis from his staff's tip, most notably when he fights Saruman in Orthanc and when he momentarily contains the Orcs in Dol Guldur.
Named Weapons: Glamdring, meaning "foe-hammer" in Sindarin.
Offscreen Teleportation: He somehow manages to move from Bilbo's party to Bag End in Fellowship before Bilbo himself gets there, even though he is seen sitting in the audience while Bilbo is running home, made invisible by the Ring. All without crossing paths with him, either. He is a wizard, but not even the most powerful beings in Middle-earth can manage actual teleportation that we know, so this is left strangely unexplained.
Oh, Crap!:
After he touches the One Ring briefly in Fellowship of the Ring, he comes to realize at least part of what he's up against as his mind forces itself to become distant to overcome the horror of a vision it invoked. By the time he's done research to figure out more about it and that it is Dark Lord Sauron's lost Ring, his return to Frodo has him twitchy, disheveled and paranoid, knowing full well that all hell was about to break loose. He breathes a sigh of relief when Frodo claims he doesn't see anything on the Ring after it's been exposed to the flames of his fireplace, making him just for a moment believe that it was only paranoia and it's "just" one of the lesser rings of power, only to immediately shift straight to despair when Frodo retracts his statement upon seeing the markings form.
While the entire Fellowship has a Mass "Oh, Crap!" when they hear drums from the well in Moria that Pippin accidentally dropped a heavily armored corpse and a bucket into, Gandalf's reaction is noticably more pronounced. This is likely not just because of the knowledge that they are about to be besieged by a massive number of orcs, but he's likely far more concerned that all this commotion might also wake up the Balrog slumbering in the depths, which is the primary reason why he didn't want to enter Moria in the first place.
A far more minor one occurs when he rallies the troops of Gondor to defend the grand gate of Minas Tirith when it's about to be breached in Return of the King. He tells the troops to stand their ground against whatever comes through the gate when it is smashed open, only to get caught briefly with visible fear himself when a dozen armored trolls come rushing in.
In The Desolation of Smaug:
Gandalf: We've been blind. And in our blindness, our enemy has returned.
Older Than They Look: While he looks like a frail 70-year-old, he's actually a Maia (god-like entity) who has been around since the creation of the universe. He's been in Middle-earth for about 2000 years, and was the *last* of the Five Wizards to arrive, so Saruman and Radagast are older in that respect.
Only Sane Man: Part of this is McKellen's often weary delivery, but Gandalf still often shows himself to be the only one with his mind together and in the right place throughout his many adventures — particularly in situations where he is desperately trying to give good advice to others and nobody will listen to him, most obviously with Thorin and Denethor. Sometimes feels like Surrounded by Idiots instead — such as in The Hobbit, where attempting to reason with the bullheaded Thorin results in him leaving for a few hours to let off some steam.
Bilbo: Where are you going?
Gandalf: To seek the company of the only one around here who's got any sense!
Bilbo: Who's that?
Gandalf: Myself, Mr. Baggins!
It's implied in the books that this is part of Gandalf's job description: be the Only Sane Man by being the one to break the problems to everyone else attempting to ignore them. Very often the reason he's gone from Frodo's or Bilbo's perception is to head forward and do this, or even to convince someone to be this themselves. Unfortunately, this allows the Enemy to take advantage of fear of what Gandalf says instead of the courage to tackle it Gandalf attempts to bring.
Our Angels Are Different: The Wizards are really angel analogs for Middle-earth taking the form of elderly humans. Further more, unlike Angels of biblical legend who generally display their power before doing as needed, Wizards tend to favor guiding others instead of simply handing the answers over to them.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Galadriel, as evidenced during the Hobbit when she's the only one who is supportive of Gandalf's quest to slay Smaug and was the one who rescued him from Dol Guldur.
Playing with Fire: His staff houses the power of fire. In An Unexpected Journey, Gandalf uses it to light up the pine cones that hang from the tree he and Thorin's Company are trapped on to ward off Azog and his warg party. He also uses it to smoke.
Power Echoes: When an outraged Thorin is about to throw Bilbo from the battlements in The Hobbit, Gandalf lets a bit of his true self show when shouting at him to let his burglar go.
Happens throughout Fellowship of the Ring: once when Bilbo flies into an immature rage and accuses Gandalf of wanting the Ring for himself; and again when the others simply refuse to listen during the meeting at Rivendell.
Progressively Prettier: Gandalf the Grey is scruffy and unkempt, with well-worn traveling robes and tangled-up hairs on his head and in his beard that all reflect how frequently on the road he is and give him a more humble appearance. When he becomes Gandalf the White, his robes are cleaner, his beard is well trimmed, he frequently has a white glow around him that gives him an angelic aura and he carries a more dignified and authoritative presence everywhere he goes to reflect his new station.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red to Saruman's Blue. While Saruman would rather stay out of the affairs of other people, Gandalf actively influences them to take action in order to further his goals of kicking Sauron out of Middle-earth.
Reverse Arm-Fold: He does this on the rare occasion that he's not clutching his staff or a pipe.
Robe and Wizard Hat: Dresses this way as Gandalf the Gray. He loses the hat on becoming Gandalf the White, but still wears flowing robes.
Shut Up, Hannibal!: Right as the orc army starts their siege on Minas Tirith, Denethor, overcome with grief over Faramir's apparent death, starts yelling at his soldiers and citizens to abandon their posts and flee for their lives. Gandalf, fed up with the Steward's foolishness and despair, whacks the guy unconscious with his staff and orders Minas Tirith's army to stand their ground.
Sleeps with Both Eyes Open: In Return of the King, Pippin attempts to take the Palantir from him whilst everyone is asleep and is briefly shocked when Gandalf appears to be awake.
Small Steps Hero: He's a proponent of it. As seen in The Hobbit, when asked why he chose Bilbo Baggins of all people, Gandalf says that it's "simply acts of kindness and love" that keep evil in check, not a grand and sweeping power like what Saruman wants.
Gandalf: Saruman believes it is only a great power that can hold evil in check. But that is not what I have found. I have found that it is the small things. Everyday deeds of ordinary folks that keep the darkness at bay. Simple acts of kindness and love.
Taking You with Me: He and the Balrog both die in their fight, but only he returns to life.
Time Abyss: He's older than time itself, definitely so after he died as Gandalf the Grey.
"Darkness took me, and I strayed out of thought and time. The stars wheeled overhead, and every day was as long as the life age of the Earth."
Token Wizard: Can be considered the Trope Codifier, being a Wizard Classic with the most knowledge of magic, its ways, and applications in a team of otherwise Badass Normals.
Took a Level in Badass: He's much stronger when he comes back as Gandalf the White.
Took a Level in Kindness: This is actually inverted from the book. In the book, Pippin notes that Gandalf the White smiles more than he did as Gandalf the Grey. In the films, however, Ian McKellen plays Gandalf the White as more serious and more stoic, while Gandalf the Grey is played as more grandfatherly - being more warm if occasionally grumpy. Gimli in the film lampshades this "This new Gandalf is even more grumpy than the old one!". In the DVD commentaries this is also mentioned, with Gandalf the White deliberately portrayed as more focused on his mission. It does change once the ring is destroyed, as Gandalf is seen softening up and laughing as the Fellowship is reunited.
Voice of the Legion: When he first appears to the Three Hunters in Fangorn, Ian McKellen's voice is over/underlain by Christopher Lee's, which has a wonderful triple meaning: the blend concealed the newcomer's identity until the last moment so that those who hadn't read the books (or been spoiled by the trailers) would not know of Gandalf's resurrection; it played to Aragorn, Gimli, and Legolas's worries that Saruman was after them, thanks to Éomer's warning and Saruman's pre-Face–Heel Turn habit of wandering the forest to talk to the Ents; and it suggested that after coming back as the White Wizard, Gandalf actually was Saruman—or as Gandalf said, "Saruman as he was meant to be." (Also, having become Saruman "the Many-Colored," it could be said he truly wasn't the White anymore, even aside from his fall to evil.)
Walking the Earth: He's not called "The Grey Wanderer" for nothing, being possibly even more well-traveled than Aragorn is.
Willfully Weak: Like the rest of the Wizards, Gandalf is actually operating at only a fraction of his full power. This is deliberate as the Valar decided to clothe the Wizards in the bodies of old men as they are meant to combat Sauron by wisdom and persuasion, not brute strength or force.
Wizard Beard: He is a wizard, after all.
Time-Passage Beard: His beard grows with age, as does his badassery.
Wizard Classic: One of the most iconic modern examples and a Trope Codifier.
The Worf Effect:
As noted in Adaptational Wimp, Gandalf loses or has a harder time of fights in the film-verse than the book-verse. Supposedly, this is more cinematic, and it raises the stakes for the Fellowship when their wise-and-powerful wizard is beaten. His staff is destroyed by the Witch-King of Angmar in the extended edition of Return Of The King and by Sauron in The Desolation of Smaug, just before Gandalf is captured.
On the other hand, he himself also subjects Saruman to this, twice. First when he forces the latter out of Theoden's body and mind, and then when he No-Sell's a fireball thrown by him and breaks his staff. This demonstrates how he is The White now, not Saruman, who has become a lesser title, "Many-Colored".
Wrestler in All of Us: In the extended version of The Desolation of Smaug, he wrestles a bit against Thráin in Dol Guldur and submits him with a spinebuster.
You Shall Not Pass!: Trope Namer, for when he destroys the narrow bridge in the mines of Moria to prevent the Balrog from reaching the rest of his comrades.