Actually Pretty Funny: While waiting for the siege of Helm's Deep to begin, Gimli can't see over the cover of the wall and demands to know what's happening, prompting Legolas to mockingly ask if he wants him to describe what's happening or if he'd rather have a box to stand on. The first suggestion makes Gimli glare at Legolas, but the outrageousness of the second one actually gets him to laugh.
Ancestral Weapon: He wields the same axes that Glóin did in The Hobbit, who apparently passed them down to his son. It's also revealed that Glóin's father, Gróin, had these in his possession as well.
Anger Born of Worry: Given his Manly Man personality, Gimli often displays his affection for the other members of the Fellowship through gruff insults.
When Aragorn comes back after being thought dead he shoves his way through a crowd while roaring: "Where is he? Where is he?! Get out of my way! I'M GONNA KILL HIM!!! [finally sees Aragorn] You are the luckiest, canniest, and the most reckless man I ever knew! [Beat, then he goes over to give Aragorn a bear hug] Bless you, laddie!"
When they finally find Merry and Pippin after days of searching for them: "You young rascals! A merry hunt you've led us on, and now we find you feasting, and ... and smoking!"
Back-to-Back Badasses: With Aragorn, during the Battle of Helm's Deep fighting the Uruk-hai.
Beware the Silly Ones: He's the goofiest member of the Fellowship after Merry and Pippin, and once the Fellowship disbands, he serves as the Comic Relief. However, he is a formidable fighter and rivals Legolas in his kill count.
The Big Guy: He is one of the fiercest fighters in the Fellowship despite his size.
Blood Knight: He loves to get into the thick of fighting and often the first one in. His response to the Uruk-hai utilizing ladders to scale walls of Helms Deep puts it best.
Gimli: Good!
Body-Count Competition: Ur-Example, with Legolas, whom he competes with throughout the story. He's not going to let a "pointy-earred elven princling" outscore him on the battlefield.
Brave Scot: Gimli may be from Middle-earth, but he comes across as this with his thick Scottish accent, red hair, and habit of calling everyone "laddie".
Bring It: Not the most mobile of warriors, so he likes to taunt enemies into coming to him.
Gimli: (To a Warg) Bring yer pretty face to my axe!
Also, in Moria:
Gimli: Let them come! There is one Dwarf yet in Moria who still draws breath!
Butt-Monkey: Most evident in The Two Towers and The Return of the King.
In The Two Towers, he struggles to keep up with Aragorn and Legolas while running across Rohan, and spends most of the fight against the Warg riders stuck under an increasing pile of dead Wargs and orcs. His short height is comically detrimental during the battle of Helm's Deep, being unable to look over the wall, donning a chainmail that's too big for him, and getting tossed by Aragorn because he can't make a long jump by himself.
In The Return of the King, he passes out from drinking too much ale while Legolas is merely starting to get slightly tipsy after nine mugs, and he's spooked by the thought of going into the Paths of the Dead.
Even in The Fellowship of the Ring he gets a moment where he's about to fall off a staircase into a chasm, only to be saved because Legolas grabbed him by the beard.
Courtly Love: Towards Galadriel, rather adorably. When confronted with her beauty and kindness, the usually gruff and boisterous Gimli mumbles nervously and becomes something of a Warrior Poet.
Galadriel: And what gift would a Dwarf ask of the Elves?
Gimli: Nothing. [Beat] Except to look upon the Lady of the Galadhrim one last time, for she is more fair than all the jewels beneath the earth.
Deadpan Snarker: He's among one of the snarkiest in the Fellowship, especially when it comes to his rivalry with Legolas.
Gimli: (after Aragorn beheads the Mouth of Sauron) I guess that concludes negotiations.
Determined Defeatist: Feels this way about the last battle in The Return of the King. In Gimli's mind, the Fellowship is about to charge into an utterly hopeless battle in which they're not only guaranteed to die, but that their chance of getting what they want out of it is minimal anyway. He then declares "What are we waiting for?" and presses onward.
Dual Wielding: Carries somewhere between seven and eleven axes. The two he uses most often are Balin's double-bladed great axe (that he picked up in Moria) and his 'walking' axe (used as a walking stick). Frequently, however, he dual wields the walking axe and his bearded axe. He also carries a variable number of throwing axes.
Elves vs. Dwarves: Initially, he is antagonistic with elves, saying one should never trust them and going on Cultural Posturing about dwarves. Then subverted when he becomes friendly with Legolas and starts to admire Galadriel's beauty and kindness.
Everyone Has Standards: Despite going at least three whole days without eating, Gimli is still reluctant to try Eowyn's stew.
Fiery Redhead: Just like his father before him, he's a rowdy ginger.
Freudian Trio: With Legolas and Aragorn; he represents the Id.
Friendly Rivalry: With Legolas. The two of them have a habit of keeping track of their kill counts during several battles.
Gimli: (After Legolas kills a Warg ready to attack him) That one counts as mine!
Have I Mentioned I Am a Dwarf Today?: He does not deal with other people: it's always a dwarf dealing with an elf or a human. He almost completely refers to other people not by their name, but only by their race. He does refer to both Aragorn and Legolas by their names at times, but usually only in life-threatening situations, such as when he shouts Aragorn's name during the battle of Helm's Deep when the wall is breached and he jumps off the ramparts into the Uruk-hai horde to prevent them from killing the downed human.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He forms a trio version of this with Aragorn and Legolas, starting with their search for Merry and Pippin. By the end, he and Legolas regard each other as friends, thereby healing the rift between their races and allowing Gimli to be the only Dwarf to sail West because of said friendship.
I Meant to Do That: When he falls off his horse in The Two Towers.
Nobody panic! It was deliberate. It was deliberate.
Interspecies Friendship: With Legolas, obviously. They are the first elf and dwarf to have a friendship of any type in thousands of years.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Even more so than his Canon counterpart from the original book, thanks to the "stereotypical modern fantasy Dwarf" side of his character (among other things) being flanderized. Yet he's nonetheless an unambiguously heroic person whose allegiance to the Free People of Middle-Earth is firm and unquestionable.
The Juggernaut: Gimili's fighting can best be described as "jump into the thick of things and keep hacking until everything is dead." It takes three creatures, all twice his size, falling on him, to pin him down, and even then only temporarily.
Jumped at the Call: He is usually the most eager to enter a battle and always has a fighting spirit.
Large Ham: He is very exuberant and pompous, and John Rhys-Davies clearly had a kick out of playing him.
Manly Man: Gimli's personality in the film is very much the gung-ho burly fighting man. This is in contrast to his more scholarly persona in the book.
No-Sell: The One Ring doesn't affect Gimli in the slightest. Upon being told it must be destroyed, Gimli attempts to do so himself and on the spot, only to learn the hard way that a simple swing of the axe won't even scratch it. Compare this to Boromir who was already falling under the Ring's temptations despite being aware that it's an Artifact of Doom. This is consistent with the books as well; dwarves cannot be corrupted the same way men and elves can, but it can heighten their greed.
Odd Friendship: With Legolas, due to their feuding races.
Our Dwarves Are All the Same: Trope Codifier. Just like his father, he's quite the prototypical dwarf: a stout, truculent, proud, and gold-loving guy with an axe and an impressive beard.
Phasmophobic Bruiser: A Manly Man and a Blood Knight with a fighting style that can best be described as The Juggernaut with an axe, not to mention enough raw physical strength to lift a warg and its rider off him. However, though he's utterly fearless in battle with hordes of orcs, he tends to get anxious around more obviously supernatural threats: on the way to Lothlorien, he speaks with great dread of the powerful sorceress he's heard dwells there (ironically, he's completely smitten when he meets her); in Fangorn Forest, he's left jumping at shadows when the trees react badly to the sight of his axe; later, he grumbles at length about the forest's bad points, only to immediately change tack when the trees begin growling at him. Finally, he not only gets nervous at following Aragorn and Legolas into a haunted mountain, but when the Dead Men of Dunharrow first begin to rise from the ground as gaseous limbs, an increasingly nervous Gimli is reduced to futilely blowing them away.
Pint-Sized Powerhouse: Dwarves are very strong for their size. Gimli would have bench-pressed a dead warg with a dead orc on top of it, if he didn't have a second dead warg lumped on top of him.
Properly Paranoid: Gimli's wary of Galadriel before he meets her, but as Frodo discovers, Galadriel is potentially as sinister as Dwarf superstitions say. It's only through sheer willpower that Galadriel was able to stay benevolent.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red to Legolas's blue, being a more gruff and proud Dwarf who delights in putting his axes to his orc enemies' heads.
Royals Who Actually Do Something: Through his father Glóin, he's distantly related to the line of Durin and the royal family of Erebor.
Self-Deprecation: Gimli admits that Dwarf-women aren't easy to spot thanks to looking indistinguishable from Dwarf-men, though he considers it ridiculous that anyone would assume the Dwarves are a One-Gender Race.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Gimli is the Manly Man (Violent Glaswegian) to Legolas' Sensitive Guy.
Short Range Guy, Long Range Guy: Is the Short Range of the pair.
Straight Man and Wise Guy: Gimli is the Wise Guy to both Aragorn and Legolas, providing physical comedy and gruff one-liners.
Strong Family Resemblance: To his father, Glóin.
Violent Glaswegian: In the film, he is very violent and he sounds very Scottish.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Legolas. The fact that Legolas's father kept Gimli's father captive in The Hobbit doesn't help, either.
Weapon Specialization: He has axes for days. His primary weapon is the walking axe he inherited from his father Gloin, but he also carries a double headed axe he picked up in Moria, a bearded axe, and two throwing axes.
Why Don't Ya Just Shoot Him?: When Elrond declares that the One Ring must be destroyed, Gimli immediately attempts the most obvious solution. Sure, it didn't work and cost him a perfectly good axe... but it sure would have saved a ''lot'' of time and trouble if it ''had'' worked.