Accidental Hero: He did not mean to destroy the Ring, but if he hadn't tried to seize it from Frodo, it would never have fallen into the fire and either Frodo would have turned into Gollum-Frodo or otherwise Sauron would have reclaimed the Ring.
Affably Evil: The Smeagol side is generally friendly and helpful.
Ambiguously Evil: In a different way from his canonical counterpart, thanks to mild Adaptational Heroism but still present. Gollum is still depicted as a complex figure caught between loyalty and betrayal but where things diverge is that in this continuity, he's portrayed as initially siding with Frodo outright and seemingly fully overcoming the Ring's corruption while showing a desire for connection and a hint of his former, more innocent self, suggesting that there may still be hope for redemption. However, this progression is disrupted during the scene at the Forbidden Pool, where Gollum’s darker instincts and treachery come to the forefront and he starts plotting against the Hobbits. While Sam’s protective suspicions contribute to the escalating conflict, it's not as much of a factor in this version and while Gollum still averts being Beyond Redemption, whether his Smeagol self would have won outright or if he would have had the same conflict between his newfound repentance and his love for the Ring, as portrayed in Tolkien's Letter 246, is left to viewer interpretation.
Animated Actors: Played for Laughs in Andy Serkis's acceptance speech at the 2003 MTV Movie Awards, where Gollum himself shows up to upstage his own performer and deliver an uncharacteristically profane rant about how grueling the filming process was while throwing shade at Dobby and Peter Jackson.
Anti-Hero: Becomes one in The Two Towers, aiding Frodo and Sam on their quest after the two spare his life, before slipping back to his old ways.
Anti-Villain: He's an antagonist in that he wants the One Ring more than anything else, and doesn't really care about the War of the Ring or what it will mean for the kingdoms of Men. He just wants the Ring, and that's all he wants. However, Frodo notes that Gollum's situation is rather pitiable, and the movies treat him as a threatening but ultimately pathetic creature.
Ax-Crazy: The Gollum side of him is unhinged, depraved and murderous.
Beauty to Beast: The opening of the third film shows how his time with the Ring turned him from a normal, even handsome Hobbit to a hairless, nearly toothless, emaciated and grey-skinned monster.
Because You Were Nice to Me: Smeagol takes a shine to Frodo and even banishes his Gollum side for a time purely because treated him decently, going so far as to call and remind him of his long-forgotten name.
Beyond Redemption: Averted just like with his book counterpart. While he goes through some Adaptational Villainy in the third film and his tragic near-repentance is removed, it is implied that even in the film's script Gollum would have turned good if things had gone better. Gollum, in fact, manages to briefly overcome The Ring and puts his trust fully in Frodo. It is only thanks to a misunderstanding caused by Faramir and his Rangers that he starts slipping back to villainy.
Big Bad Ensemble: Of Return of the King. He's the main threat for Frodo and Sam, while Sauron is the main threat for the entire Free People of Middle-Earth.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Gollum's a Card-Carrying Villain, but Sméagol is more underhanded in his villainy. In the extended edition, Gollum even points out to Frodo that Sméagol's promise to work with Frodo was a lie.
Gollum: Then we will finds it.
Smeagol: AND TAKES IT FOR ME!!!
Gollum:... for us.
Smeagol: Yes-yes, we meants for us!
Body Horror: His transformation from a hobbit into the goblin-like creature he is now wasn't pretty. At one point he looked like a living corpse.
Breakout Character: Had one scene of note in The Hobbit. In The Lord of the Rings Film Trilogy, he's a big attraction.
Cain and Abel: The Cain to his cousin Déagol's Abel; Sméagol murdered him for the Ring. Played With since Déagol was also being corrupted by the Ring, and in the moment was trying just as hard to murder Sméagol for possession as vice versa. Had Sméagol not overpowered him, it is quite likely that Déagol would have gone down the same slippery slope.
Catchphrase:
"My Precious" is what he calls the One Ring, as his obsession with the Ring covets all of his terrible actions.
"Gollum, Gollum!" This is how the split personality side of him got its name, from a hacking cough he developed while it was in his possession.
Chronic Villainy: He struggles between his loyalty to Frodo who spared his life and was kind to him, and his temptation by the Ring. In the end, the temptation wins, and he becomes a full-on villain by the third movie.
The Corruptible: He (and his cousin) both become murderously possessive in very short time under the Ring's influence compared to the likes of Frodo and Sam. Even the first Pre-Insanity Reveal shot of Sméagol examining and hooking a live bait-worm with a smile seems to be suggesting he might've always had more darkness in him than Frodo or Sam did, though he very likely never would've given in to it if he hadn't come in contact with the Ring.
Covered with Scars: Has some nasty scars riddled all over his back, seemingly from being tortured by Sauron's forces over the location of the Ring as these scars are absent in An Unexpected Journey.
Creepy High-Pitched Voice: One of the most iconic voices to fit this trope; it's incredible how Andy Serkis, who normally speaks with a baritone, managed to pull it off without lasting damage to his vocal cords.
The Determinator: A rather dark version. He survives starvation, the dead lands, the marshes, torture, and falling off a cliff, all powered by his lust for his precious. Possession of the One Ring extends its bearers lifespan indefinitely. However, once they lose possession of it, all that age catches up with them very quickly, as it did to Bilbo, after living 111 years but barely seeming to age until he gave up the ring. In comparison, the Ring extended Gollum's lifespan until he was approaching 600 years old. Several years after losing the ring, he's still going strong.
Dirty Coward: His usual method of attack is striking while his quarry's guard is down. If he faces any kind of retaliation for this, he'll start whimpering.
Does This Remind You of Anything?: The relationship between Smeagol and Gollum resembles several real-life psychological scenarios:
Gollum's obsession with the Ring is reminiscent of methamphetamine addiction. It turns his body thin and haggard, destroys his identity and willpower, drives him to kill in order to possess it, and generally consumes his life.
Gollum, as an Enemy Within born from guilt, is a Split Personality and acts like depression, anxiety and self-hatred do for many people.
Many elements of the Sméagol/Gollum dialogue resemble a real-life abusive relationship: one side is constantly goaded into crime by the other one who appears loving, comforting and guiding. When the meek Smeagol tries to break free, Gollum switches to threatening and reminding Smeagol that Gollum is the reason they survive. Smeagol banishes Gollum and can barely believe it, but comes back crying at the first sign of betrayal and this is just what Gollum is waiting for to welcome him back into the fold.
And of course, Sméagol "loves and hates the Ring as he loves and hates himself", which sounds awfully like Stockholm syndrome.
Driven to Madness: By the Ring. It corrupted his mind into a complete obsession, to the point he developed a Split Personality and is willing to do whatever it takes to get it back.
Driven to Villainy: He was a regular Stoor hobbit once, but the One Ring drove him into killing his cousin. If it hadn't been for that, he probably would have had a normal life.
Et Tu, Brute?: His reaction when he falls into the lava of Mount Doom is to silently stare at the Ring in shock, wondering why it betrayed him but still trying to hold it up away from the lava as he sinks into it.
"Eureka!" Moment: At the end of his tantrum when he loses the One Ring, he looks at his reflection and realizes exactly where it is - Bilbo's got it in his pocket.
Even Evil Has Standards: Wretched and skulking as he is, even Gollum understands the existential threat Sauron represents. Having seen and experienced firsthand what the Dark Lord is capable of, Gollum is as fearful as everyone else is of going into Mordor and risking the Ring falling back into his hands.
Evil Counterpart: To Samwise. Sam genuinely cares about Frodo while Gollum manipulates him.
Evil Is Petty: The Gollum side takes gleeful delight in tormenting others and inflicting harm.
Evil Makes You Monstrous: Five-hundred or so years with the One Ring left him an emaciated creature barely recognizable as a hobbit, with glowing eyes to help him see in the dark.
Evil Old Folks: Gollum is over 500 years old thanks to the Ring's longevity, and though it may be more due to his subterranean lifestyle than the ravages of age, his frail, bald, gaunt appearance resembles a wicked, crooked-backed old man.
Evil Sounds Raspy: He speaks with a grating, high-pitched croak that sounds like a caterwauling lynx. It's notable in that he initially sounded normal in the flashback, but the second he laid eyes on the Ring, his voice immediately sunk to its raspy tone.
Faux Affably Evil: When Sméagol finally sides with Gollum, the end result is this — a false front of good cheer that hides a scheming, devious trickster who's bent on killing Frodo and Sam to get the One Ring.
Final Boss: In the video game versions of The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King, when the heroes are about to throw the ring, they must face Gollum before completing their objective.
The Fog of Ages: He's lived over five-hundred years, most of it in the mountains with only the ring, and has since forgotten almost everything about his life prior, even his own name.
Foil: To Bilbo. Bilbo's life as a Ring-bearer began with an act of Mercy while Sméagol began his with murder.
Freudian Trio: With Frodo and Sam; represents the Id.
From Nobody to Nightmare: He was a normal hobbit living a happy life in Gladden Fields until he found the ring and was driven mad almost instantly by it.
Game Face: In the films it becomes fairly easy to spot when Gollum or Sméagol are speaking; Sméagol's pupils are large and doe-like and his expressions are far less angular, whereas Gollum has pinprick pupils and his face contorts much more harshly.
Glowing Eyes of Doom: In The Fellowship of the Ring and An Unexpected Journey, Gollum's pupils reflect a pale blue-white eyeshine in the dark.
Gollum Made Me Do It: The Trope Namer. Sméagol initially is quite torn between his developing loyalty to Frodo being genuinely nice to him with no strings attached, and his utter obsession with the One Ring clouding his judgment. But then, the Gollum side of him bullies and berates Sméagol into accepting that the Ring matters more than anything else, and that Sméagol must betray Frodo to do it, stopping this potential turn to goodness before it can actually happen.
Go Mad from the Isolation: He's spent five-hundred years alone in the mountains with no contact besides the Ring, letting it absolutely dominate his entire being.
Go Out with a Smile: He falls into the lava of Mount Doom, glomping the ring with a placid gleeful smile on his face.
The Heavy: Since Sauron has no corporeal form to directly affect the world and seldom ever knows where Frodo and Sam are with the Ring, Gollum steps in as the most commonly recurring threat to their quest. Ironically, he is also the reason it even succeeds.
Heel–Face Door-Slam: Sméagol gets the upper hand in the second film and puts his trust fully in Frodo... and then Frodo has to trick him into getting captured by the Rangers of Ithilien, who are none too gentle. He feels betrayed by Frodo because of this and starts plotting to murder him and Sam. Also, while his tragic near-repentance from the book doesn't happen in the movies, there is a scene in Shelob's lair that drives home the same point: when Frodo fights Gollum in Shelob's lair, his Sméagol-persona returns causing Frodo to feel pity towards him and spare him. However, Frodo then admits the purpose of the quest to Gollum, at which he snaps and attacks Frodo again. This is the last time his Sméagol-persona appears in the movies.
Gollum: It wasn't us! It wasn't us! Sméagol wouldn't hurt master! We promised! You must believe us! It was The Precious! The Precious made us do it!
Frodo: I have to destroy it, Sméagol... I have to destroy for both of our sakes...
Gollum: Noooooo!
Heel–Face Revolving Door: He keeps wavering between "Gollum", the murderous sneaky bastard who wants to kill the thieves, and "Sméagol", the last vestige of his former self who yearns for friendship. Eventually Sméagol sides with Gollum outright.
Hobbits: He used to be a hobbit before the One Ring corrupted him (as Tolkien would clarify later on, he was a Stoor hobbit, a sub-type of hobbit who mainly lived along the banks of the River Anduin before settling in the Shire). This is part of why he's so damn tough.
Hoist by His Own Petard: Gollum swears on the One Ring to do no harm to Sam and Frodo. Frodo warns him that the ring is treacherous, but it will hold him to his word. Gollum then breaks his oath. He's ultimately undone by the very ring he was warned of, when its addictive property causes Frodo to wrestle with him and push him off the ledge into the crack of doom.
Holy Burns Evil: He's so utterly corrupted that he reacts to the taste and smell of Elven bread as if it's raw faeces, and even touching something as mundane as rope made by the Elves causes unbearable pain.
Hunched Hairless Humanoid: The depiction of Gollum in the movies could be considered a "prototype" of this trope— he is pale-skinned, thin to the point of emaciation, and entirely hairless outside of a few stringy remnants on his head, and walks in a bent-over, crawling stance that uses both hands and feet. Originally he was a fairly normal hobbit, but centuries of unnaturally extended life spent hiding in lightless, maze like caverns slowly turned him into what he is now.
I Lied: Invoked when Frodo reminds him he swore on the precious.
Gollum: (while choking Frodo) Mustn't go that way! Mustn't hurt the precious!
Frodo: You swore! You swore on the precious! Sméagol promised!
Gollum: (laughs mockingly) Sméagol lied.
I'm a Humanitarian: In An Unexpected Journey, he's shown eating anything that falls into his lair, including human-like creatures. He devours a goblin and contemplates eating Bilbo as well.
It's All About Me: The Gollum side of his personality is profoundly solipsistic, greedy and vain.
I Was Quite a Looker: He was adorably handsome prior to finding the ring. Now, it's hard to believe he was ever anything but a beast.
Kick the Dog: In Return of the King, Gollum really doesn't need to rub his betrayal of Frodo and Frodo's immediate life-threatening situation in the latter's face as gleefully as he does, when he sings a taunting song in Shelob's lair and also when he (in the extended edition) taunts Frodo on the slope of Mount Doom.
Lack of Empathy: Again, the Gollum side has zero compassion.
Laughably Evil: As vile, manipulative, and untrustworthy as he is, his childish antics are frequently displayed as comical and he does provide a lot of levity throughout the films.
Loincloth: His only clothing is a small loincloth - presumably what's left of his pants from the time he was a hobbit. He still has a pocket on it he can put the ring into.
Madness Makeover: His slow physical transformation from the eccentric-eyed but relatively normal hobbit Sméagol into the demented and dangerous creature he is now gets portrayed in unforgettable detail in the opening of The Return of the King.
Manchild: Sméagol is very childlike and even playful, speaking in singsong and capering around. Sometimes he does this when he's happy that Frodo is being nice, sometimes he's happy because he's feeding Frodo to Shelob. And he's both at once during the riddle game with Bilbo.
A Molten Date with Death: How Gollum meets his end when he and the ring fall into Mount Doom's perpetually-erupting caldera, where he simultaneously sinks and melts. The ring manages to last a good 30 more seconds, but it's eventually melted into nothingness as well. This differs from both the book and the earlier animated adaptation, where Gollum and the Ring both instantly vanish under the magma's surface.
Mood-Swinger: He can be prone to ranting furiously to himself, snarling at his companions, then adopting a chipper and helpful demeanor all in the span of a minute. The fact that he is insane, has two personalities that are not always aligned with each other, and can be deceptive when he wants makes it hard to properly gauge what his emotional state really is.
Muscles Are Meaningless: Centuries with little food and shut away from civilization has left Gollum practically skeletal but he is still surprisingly strong.
Never My Fault: Somewhat more sympathetic version as he was about to turn good until Frodo admitted the purpose of the quest to him. Smeagol blames the Ring for making him want to kill Frodo in Shelob's lair, even though it's all too obvious by this point that he'd turned bad of his own volition. It's also the last time you see his good side as this is used to cement his Heel–Face Door-Slam and to replace his tragic near-repentance from the original book.
The Oath-Breaker: Just like in the books, he swears to serve Frodo "on the Precious." Smeagol even uses the fact that he made the vow to argue against Gollum's protestations of returning to Mordor, showing that even he understands the importance of upholding an oath. Even so, just like in the books, he ultimately breaks it when he tries to kill Frodo, and in the extended edition he coldly says "Smeagol lied" when Frodo reminds him of his promise.
Offscreen Teleportation: Uses this to terrifying effect during his scene in An Unexpected Journey, using it to vanish from sight and pop up behind Bilbo multiple times during their encounter. Even without the Ring's invisibility, he's plenty stealthy on his own.
Oh, Crap!: He has a massive freakout when he reaches for the One Ring to kill Bilbo after losing their game of riddles, only to find it missing.
Outside-Context Problem: He has nothing to do with the armies of Sauron, the attempted warmongering of Saruman, or the orcs that come with it. Sméagol and Gollum just want the One Ring more than anything else in the world. There's not even really a plan for what to do once they get it; Sméagol and Gollum just both want the Ring, and that's it. And yet, by acting as a guide for Frodo and Samwise to Mount Doom, as well as trying to backstab Frodo at the worst possible moments, he almost gives the Dark Lord a win entirely without meaning to. In the end, he also becomes this trope against the Dark Lord, when he attacks a Ring-corrupted Frodo in Mount Doom and his struggle with the latter for the Ring guarantees its destruction — if it hadn't been for Gollum's last intervention, it's likely that the Ring would've been promptly retrieved from Frodo by the approaching Ringwraiths, and Sauron would have won.
Pluralses: Has a tendency to add "es" sounds to the ends of his plurals, saying things like "hobbitses" and "orcses."
Pre-Insanity Reveal: Gollum is a prime example. Originally a Stoor hobbit named Sméagol, he was corrupted mentally and physically by the Ring by the time Bilbo meets him in The Hobbit.
Puppy-Dog Eyes: When Sméagol is in control, his eyes are almost adorably large and doe-like. It makes it easier for him to present himself as pitiable after he agrees with the Gollum personality to kill Frodo and Sam for the One Ring.
Pyrrhic Victory: In the end, he is finally able to reunite with his Precious. A minute later, he falls to his death into the fires of Mount Doom.
Really Seven Hundred Years Old: He's at least 500 years old, thanks his possession of the One Ring extending his lifespan far beyond what's normal for a hobbit.
Reformed, but Rejected: In the Jackson films, Sam never completely trusts him even when he's loyal to Frodo, and beyond that spends much of The Two Towers being notably crueler and less sympathetic to him than he needs to be. When Gollum begins plotting in earnest, though... In the extended edition, there's a scene toward the end of The Two Towers where Sam does apparently start to trust Gollum in earnest, saying that he's being "very decent". And it's just before Gollum decides to go back to plotting Frodo and Sam's deaths, making this a case of Dramatic Irony, and making Sam's fury upon overhearing Gollum's scheming in the start of the third movie even more understandable.
Sanity Slippage: All thanks to the One Ring, and being away from it for so long.
Serkis Folk: Trope Codifier in the Jackson films. Gollum is a CGI character, but played on the set by Andy Serkis in a motion-capture suit.
Shadow Archetype: Gollum is a shadow to both Bilbo and Frodo. He is to some extent a shadow to Sam.
Sinister Nudity: Sméagol started out as a fully clothed hobbit, but as he got corrupted by the Ring, losing his sanity and turning into Gollum, he stopped wearing clothes apart from a tiny Loincloth that is just enough to cover the essentials.
Sore Loser: When he loses the game of riddles between himself and Bilbo, he tries to kill the Baggins anyway out of spite.
Spanner in the Works: Had Gollum not ended up tagging along with Frodo and Sam, then the quest would have failed, as Frodo ultimately proved incapable of resisting the Ring's power. It's only Gollum's attempt to take back the Ring for himself that led to its destruction before the Ringwraiths rushing straight to Mount Doom could retrieve it, independent of the rest of the Fellowship or the Dark Lord.
Split Personality: He lost his sanity from spending too much time by himself, with the Ring as his only company, and developed two distinct personalities: the curious, loyal and often playful Sméagol, and the hateful, murderous Gollum. The two selves often engage in arguments with each other.
Stalker Without a Crush: In his quest to retake the Ring, he trails the Fellowship all throughout the first film, catches up to Frodo and Sam at the beginning of the second, and continues to follow them in the third after his betrayal was revealed.
Starring Special Effects: He is one of the main characters of The Two Towers and The Return of the King, and he's created by motion capture.
Sympathetic Murderer: Even if he did kill his own cousin for the possession of the Ring, you cannot help but feel sorry for the guy. The fact that the Ring has long consumed his soul does not help one bit. Also, Deagol himself was also being corrupted by the Ring and trying just as hard to kill him, after denying Smeagol his birthday present, making apparent that the Ring would have reduced one of them to the same result either way.
Sympathy for the Devil: And how. Despite being an utterly loathsome creature, Bilbo, Frodo and Gandalf all can't help but feel pity for the miserable wretch the Ring turned him into. It is this very sympathy and the mercy Gollum is given that allows for the Ring to finally be destroyed, and prevents the Ring's otherwise-certain return to its true master.
Talking to Themself: Usually represented by having him talk to his reflection, with the camera focusing on himself for Sméagol and the reflection for Gollum.
That Man Is Dead: By the time he resurfaces in Mordor to confront Frodo and Sam, there's no Smeagol anymore, only Gollum.
Frodo: You swore! Smeagol swore to the Precious!
Gollum: Smeagol lied.
This Is Your Brain on Evil: Courtesy of the One Ring.
Token Evil Teammate: Of the trio he forms with Frodo and Sam. The hobbits are undergoing the journey to destroy the Ring. Gollum is an insane individual who's being dragged along as their not-always-willing guide and who frequently goes back-and-forth on deciding whether he wants to reclaim the Ring or stay loyal to Frodo. In the end, he chooses the Ring.
Trademark Favorite Food: Fisssh. During the hundreds of years he spent in his cave, his primary food source was raw fish, which he grew really fond of. He can no longer stomach food prepared any other way, being disgusted when Sam cooks a rabbit he killed into a stew; an Extended Edition scene has Frodo offer him a bit of lembas bread, but Gollum can't stomach that either and resigns himself to starvation instead.
Tragic Villain: In Gandalf's words, his life's story is "tragic".
Verbal Tic: "My Precioussss", "Gollum, Gollum!" He also has a tendency to call random things, usually people "precious" as well and punctuate his sentences with it, as though no matter what he was paying attention to his mind was constantly on the Ring.
Verbal Tic Name: He is only known as "Gollum" from the gurgling sound he makes in his throat.
Was Once a Man: The prologue of Return of the King shows us his gradual corruption by the Ring from a normal Hobbit into the creature Gollum. This was done at the insistence of Andy Serkis, who wanted viewers to see there really was an actor behind Gollum.