Adaptational Badass: In the books, Merry's primary help in defeating of the Witch-King is due to a magical Elven dagger he gets after being rescued from the Barrow-Downs, one designed specifically to kill or injure the Witch-King. The movies don't include the whole Barrow sequence, which means Merry doesn't get the sword... which means he gets to damage the Witch-King simply because he's a hobbit and not of the race of Men. The Witch-King's contact "poisoning" also doesn't take place, so he also holds out a little longer in the fight itself rather than just the one plunge, with him and Éowyn tag-teaming for a few seconds before the Witch-King implodes and that is what nearly knocks him out.
Merry (and Pippin) get another point in their favor: while the book versions were part of a months-long "conspiracy" and knew Frodo was leaving long before he actually did, Merry in particular jumps at the chance to join in by helping Frodo leave the Shire via Bucklebury Ferry while being chased by a Black Rider / Ringwraith. It also doesn't take Merry long to ascertain something strange is going on, given he didn't have the same time to observe Bilbo with the Ring as he did in the books.
Badass Normal: Merry, just a normal hobbit, is the one who defeats the Witch-King alongside Éowyn, out of all the trained soldiers, Proud Warrior Race Guys, and other larger-than-life figures present at the Battle.
Big Brother Instinct: Displays this in the Extended Edition of Return of the King, worrying about Pippin as the two are separated. Merry berates Pippin for his curiosity, gives him his half of the pipe weed because he knows Pippin smokes all of his, and is clearly overtaken with worries when Gandalf leaves with Pippin for Minas Tirith. He remarks to Aragorn that he and Pippin have always been together, ever since they were kids, and he showed Pippin all he knows, and kept him safe, and now worries about being unable to protect him. Ironically after the Battle of the Pelennor fields, it's Pippin who finds an unconscious Merry and saves him.
Broke Your Arm Punching Out Cthulhu: He, along with Éowyn (who also literally breaks her arm), nearly dies from contact with the Witch-King after killing him.
Color-Coded for Your Convenience: Merry wears a yellow vest mainly to distinguish himself from Pippin, as most of the time people can't tell them apart.
Damsel out of Distress: When the Rohirrim attack the Uruk-hai who have captured them, Merry sees that as an opportunity for them to escape their captors and into the forest.
Deadpan Snarker: He's the snarkiest out of the four hobbits, with a biting comment for almost every occasion. One such instance is wishing Pippin luck on finding dead rats among the wreckage of Isengard when Pippin complains he's grown hungry from all the chaos. And then there's this exchange:
Pippin: You need people of intelligence on this sort of mission... quest... thing.
Merry: Well, that rules you out, Pip.
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: The Witch-King of Angmar vs. a hobbit. Merry (teamed up with Éowyn) won.
Distressed Dude: Alongside Pippin when they are cornered by Saruman's Uruk-hai and Boromir has to rescue them, though he dies attempting to do so and they are taken by the Uruks soon after. However, they later escape on their own after the Rohirrim—who launch an attack on the party—proves to be enough of a distraction for the orcs.
The Fool: Together with Pippin; their personalities are less distinct in the movies, though Merry is a little wiser.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He has been this with Pippin since childhood. Merry himself states that he was always the one to get both of them in trouble, but also the one to pull Pippin out.
I Just Want to Be Badass: When the battle lines are forming, he is dismissed as being unable to fight. But when it goes down, he's the first to march into an army.
Improbable Aiming Skills: Like all hobbits, he makes stone-throwing a lethal art. He headshots orcs from miles away and kills all of them with nothing but rocks, all from atop Treebeard.
Intergenerational Friendship: With King Théoden and Éowyn.
Interspecies Friendship: Also counts as this. He and Pippin also have this with Treebeard and the other members of the Fellowship.
Jumped at the Call: He and Pippin share their willingness to protect Frodo.
Kubrick Stare: When he's yelling at the Ents for refusing to fight, though it's actually incidental due to him having to look up at them.
The McCoy: When convincing the Ents to fight.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Éowyn, when they both joined the Battle of the Pelennor Fields.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Blue to Pippin's Red, being more of the planner. In reverse, however, it is he who ends up joining the war-like Rohirrim army as opposed to Pippin's placement among the more-civilized Gondor. He's also more vocal on convincing the Ents to take a stand against Saruman.
The Smart Guy: Of the hobbit foursome. He at least knows his way around more than the other three, which takes them as far as Bree. He's also the one who initiates his and Pippin's escape from their Uruk captors, and tries to convince the Ents to take up arms against Isengard.
The Straight Man: When he and Pippin are left alone, Merry is shown to be very capable and sensible, even wise, at times.
Those Two Guys: With Pippin.
Took a Level in Badass: The first film showed him as a troublemaker and general nuisance. The third had him facing down the armies of Mordor—and the Witch-King of Angmar—without the slightest hesitation or fear.
Trickster Archetype: With Pippin, especially since Merry is the one who starts trouble.
Unrelated in the Adaptation: Possibly. He and Pippin are stated to be cousins in the books, but in the films it's never mentioned if they're related or not.