Adaptational Badass: In the book there's no mention of any noteworthy foe in Moria Pippin killed (He probably took out some orcs along the rest of the fellowship). In the film however, he allows Legolas to give the killing blow to the Cave Troll, by stabbing it in the back of the neck which makes it bare its throat as it winces, allowing Legolas to shoot it there and finally kill it.
The Atoner: During his time in Minas Tirith, after he offers his services to Denethor as repayment for Boromir's sacrifice. Clearly the Palantír has affected him so greatly that he's no longer as foolish as he was before.
Batman Gambit: He tells Treebeard to take him back towards Isengard, giving a rather pithy reason as to why, and while Treebeard seems confused, he agrees to it. Pippin's real reason for doing this is so that Treebeard can see what Saruman has done to Fangorn firsthand and trigger his Berserk Button, which finally prompts him and the other Ents to take immediate action against Saruman's forces. Merry has a look of amazement on his face when he realizes it and sees the Ent army emerge from the forest.
Big Eater: Even more than most hobbits are. See his quote above. There's also a scene in the Extended Edition of The Fellowship of the Ring where Legolas comments that a single bite of lembas bread would fill a grown man's stomach for a day's journey while eating some. When Merry asks how many Pippin ate, he quietly answers "four", leaving it ambiguous if he meant "four bites" or "four loaves".
Brave Scot: He's the only hobbit in the Fellowship with a Scottish accent (to achieve greater comic timing), and he's willing to fight when he has to. Just ask that Orc he stabbed In the Back at Minas Tirith. Peter Jackson justifies his accent by pointing out that his father is the Thain and one of his ancestors invented golf.
Break the Cutie: He suffered heavily from looking into the Palantír, for starters.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Pippin is a man of leisure and pleasure, with Merry even saying in gest that he's never done a hard day's work. But he is surprisingly crafty when he needs to be, coming up with a plan on the fly to lead the Ents against Saruman and stop his creation of orcs, playing a crucial role in Sauron's later defeat.
Buffy Speak: During the creation of the Fellowship: "You need people of intelligence in this sort of mission... quest... thing."
Constantly Curious: He tries grabbing an arrow from a dwarf's still-armored corpse, which causes it to fall down a well and alert every goblin in Moria to their presence. He also looks into the Palantír just to see it once.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: While not the most intelligent member of the cast, at times Pippin can be one of the bravest, alternating with ideas that are almost stupid. Case in point: messing with the corpse in Balin's tomb that alerts the goblins to their position, only to come out as one of the fiercest hobbit fighters in the battle sequence that follows.
Then there's the whole sequence in The Two Towers when the hobbits escape their capture by the Uruk-hai, flee into the forest, and convince Treebeard to destroy Orthanc. The one who manages to mastermind the whole thing? Pippin, who bites off his broach to leave as a sign for Aragorn in pursuit, cuts his ropes on a discarded pike when the group stops for the night, frees Merry, and provides the Insane Troll Logic with the intent of causing Treebeard to head to see Saruman's destruction of the forest.
Cowardly Lion: It becomes increasingly clear how in over his head Pippin is after he looks into the Palantir. This culminates in him having a Heroic BSoD at the Siege of Gondor that almost gets him killed because he's frozen in fear, but he still draws his sword and saves Gandalf's life mere moments later.
Damsel out of Distress: He has the brilliant idea of biting off their cloaks' brooch in order to leave behind a marker for Aragorn and company to trace.
Distressed Dude: Aside from being captured by the Uruk-hai alongside Merry, Pippin finds himself in need of Gandalf's rescue when Denethor attacks him for interfering with his offspring murder/suicide. In truth, Pippin was trying to save Faramir's life, who's even more in distress.
Fire-Forged Friends: With Gandalf, who didn't seem to like him very much until their siege of Minas Tirith when they saved Faramir's life.
The Fool: Being the youngest and most impressionable of the bunch, he's more prone to foolishness than his companions. According to Gandalf, he is a "Fool of a Took!"
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He has been this with Merry since childhood.
Hidden Depths: Like all hobbits, there's more courage to Pippin that meets the eye. When Gandalf is nearly killed by the Witch King, Pippin attempts to charge the Fell Beast, whose roar was terrifying enough to make even Shadowfax waver.
He and Merry are the first to follow Aragorn when he charged the army of Mordor.
Iconic Item: Pippin's grey-green scarf.
Idle Rich: As Merry points out, he's never done a day's work in his life.
Interspecies Friendship / Odd Friendship: He and Merry have this with Treebeard and Boromir. Once he's brought to Gondor, he befriends Faramir quite easily as well.
Improbable Aiming Skills: Like all hobbits, his aim with stones is downright lethal. He helps the Ents take Isengard by headshotting orcs with stones from miles away, hitting every one and taking all of them down.
Jumped at the Call: He and Pippin share their willingness to protect Frodo.
Manchild: He is the youngest of the Fellowship, after all.
Mind Rape: Suffers one from looking at the Palantír when Sauron comes into the picture.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Pippin's curiosity has him attempting to pull an arrow from a dwarf corpse, causing it to fall—rather noisily, at that—down a well. This leads to the Company being attacked by goblins and a cave troll, and Gandalf's death.
Plucky Comic Relief: His humor is the one thing that keeps himself and his friends going.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red to Merry's Blue, being the more impulsive of the two. The roles are switched as Pippin ends up in Gondor and becomes a guard under Denethor's service.
Screams Like a Little Girl: In the first film, Merry and Pippin steal Gandalf's best firework and light it prematurely — while inside a tent. When it actually goes off, Pip lets out the girliest scream you can imagine. Billy Boyd didn't know that the thing was actually going to explode, so the scream is genuine.
Those Two Guys: With Merry.
Took a Level in Badass: From foolish young Took to Troll-slayer. Although his troll-slaying doesn't actually appear in the film, he has to make do with uber-orc slaying. Not to mention, he's the main reason why the Beacons of Amon Din are lit in the first place, therefore signaling to Rohan that Gondor is in dire need of help.
Trickster Archetype: An innocent version, with Merry, though this toned down as they make their transition to badasses.