Acrofatic: He may be on the pudgy side (even Gollum calls him a 'fat hobbit'), but he can keep up with the others because he's a hobbit.
Act of True Love: The entirety of the trilogy is one of these for Samwise. He follows Frodo into Mordor, being his keeper for the whole trip, and refuses to abandon Frodo even when the latter is manipulated by Gollum into ditching him.
And This Is for...: He, the normally non-threatening gardener, does this, dedicating Orc kills to those important to him: "This is for Mr. Frodo!" (stab) "And this is for the Shire!" (slice) "And this is for my old Gaffer!" (thrust)
Audience Surrogate: Along with the other hobbits.
Babies Ever After: He's seen having married Rosie Cotton in he epilogue's final scene, and having two children. In the books, Sam would have 13 children.
Badass Normal: An ordinary guy who wants nothing more than to take care of his garden back in Hobbiton, Sam goes on to save Frodo countless times, takes out quite a few orcs, and drives off Shelob all by himself with nothing more than a Cool Sword and the Light of Earendil.
Battle Butler: For Frodo. Don't harm him while Sam is around.
Beware the Nice Ones: Gardener? Check. Loving father and husband? Check. Terrifying opponent to anyone or anything that threatens his beloved master? Big check.
Big Shadow, Little Creature: He tries to scare a squad of orc warriors this way. Unlike in the book, it doesn't really work. Also unlike the book, he kills them all easily.
Bittersweet Ending: Though Frodo has left him, Sam gets to raise a family with Rosie.
Bookends: Samwise is the first member of the Fellowship to appear in the extended cut of The Fellowship of the Ring and the last member to appear in The Return of the King.
Breakout Character: Sam is beloved by fans, and is one of the most loved characters in the entire series, due in no small part to his absolute Undying Loyalty towards Frodo, showing next to no signs of temptation from the One Ring, and the several badass feats he accomplishes across the story despite being nothing more than a gardener.
Caring Gardener: A shot of Sam tending a plant appears over Gandalf's narration that hobbits are fond of growing things. He's an almost-unmitigated Nice Guy (Sméagol/Gollum is an exception) and his care and concern are some of the most major factors that let Frodo bear the Ring long enough to reach Mount Doom.
The Cassandra: The fact that Frodo becomes sympathetic towards Sméagol doesn't help, either.
The Champion: While it's frequently spoken of how Sam is The Hero, he fits this in actuality more specifically because of his role being to help Frodo specifically. It's highly likely Sam wouldn't have even been a part of the Fellowship if not for Frodo electing to take the Ring. In short, where Frodo goes, Sam follows.
Cool Sword: When he wields Sting in Frodo's defense.
Cowardly Lion: Sam begins the story a timid soul, being unable to speak to his crush, Rosie, cowing immediately under Gandalf's anger, and acting unnerved at how far from the Shire he will have to travel. Despite all of that, he never backs down from a threat, no matter how overpowering it is, whether it be goblins, trolls, a sword-wielding Aragorn, the Nazgul, or even freaking Shelob.
Deadpan Snarker: He's usually rather polite and mild-mannered, but when he gets angry, annoyed, or impatient with someone, he displays a surprising creativity in thinking up biting comments. Unsurprisingly, he's at his snarkiest when dealing with Gollum.
Determinator: He's Frodo's only companion to stay with him clear from the Shire to Mt. Doom, in spite of being turned away by Frodo multiple times, and in spite of Frodo and the others twice secretly conspiring with regards to the journey without Sam or the other hobbits. He also saves Frodo from an Eldritch Abomination and a horde of orcs, then carries him partway up Mt. Doom on his own back. The reason for this? Because Gandalf made him swear never to leave Frodo, and it's definitely a promise he intends to carry out.
"Then let us be rid of it. Come on, Mr. Frodo. I can't carry it for you, but I can carry you!"
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: Did a hobbit just kick the crap out of a Giant Spider? Oh, yes.
Distressed Dude: Finds himself in trouble twice and has to be rescued by Frodo in both instances, first from drowning, then from the Easterlings after he fell off the peak among the rocks.
Dressing as the Enemy: He and Frodo disguise themselves as orcs during the last leg of their journey.
Dual Wielding: A few times. In Moria, he wields a sword and a frying pan at the same time in at least one shot (shortly after Frodo is nearly skewered by the cave troll). He also dual-wields his regular sword and Sting when storming the tower of Cirith Ungol.
Even the Loving Hero Has Hated Ones: Sam is normally a mousy sweetheart, but when it comes to Gollum he can be quite nasty. In The Return of the King he's taken a step towards threats of murder if Gollum steps out of line.
Freudian Trio: With Frodo and Gollum; represents the Superego.
Frying Pan of Doom: Sam uses his cooking gear to whack some goblins in Moria.
Happily Married: At the very end with his longtime crush, Rosie, alluded to a few times early on.
Heroic Willpower: Even in Mordor, mere miles from where the Ring is at its strongest, the One Ring is unable to ensnare and corrupt Sam.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Frodo as they trekked to Mordor. It's implied that they've known each other for years, but he still calls him "Mr. Frodo" out of respect, due to the latter being a gentle-hobbit.
Hot-Blooded: He definitely has moments of this.
Humble Hero: Towards the end of the second film, Sam idly wonders whether their journey will ever be put into stories or songs, specifically Frodo's part in the War of the Ring. Frodo then remarks that he has left out one of the chief characters, that being himself. Judging from Sam's reaction, he clearly wasn't expecting such high praise, and from his best friend at that.
I Gave My Word: At the end of Fellowship when Frodo tries to set off to Mordor all by himself, Sam follows him and almost drowns in the river because he can't swim. When Frodo rescues him, Sam reminds him of the promise he made to Gandalf to stick by his side.
I Just Want to Be Normal: All he wants to do is to go back home and be with his friends.
Ignorant of the Call: As stated above, Sam doesn't consider himself any sort of hero at all, despite the fact that he performs heroic actions as easily as regular people breathe. The only time he comes close to acknowledging that he's a hero is when, during the fight in Balin's Tomb, he kills a goblin with a frying pan and says, "I think I might be getting the hang of this." Apparently, Tolkien himself considered Sam more of a hero than Frodo.
Incorruptible Pure Pureness: Sam shows almost no corruption from the Ring, despite being the member of the Fellowship other than Frodo who is in closest and most regular proximity to it. He even willingly returns the Ring to Frodo despite being extremely close to Mordor. Indeed, it's Sam's unwavering upbeat and positive attitude (which Sam retains until the final hours of their quest, where he finally admits that he doesn't think that there will be a return journey), replete with memories of the Shire and reminders to Frodo of what they are trying to save, that is crucial in Frodo finding the strength to continue on.
Frodo: What are we holding onto, Sam?
Sam: That there’s some good in this world, Mr. Frodo… and it’s worth fighting for.
Jerkass to One: Sam hates Gollum. It's kind of part of his natural tendency to be aggressive towards anyone he thinks wishes Frodo harm, but compared to the book he's unrelentingly hostile towards Gollum all the way through. In the book, Sam was never shy about letting Gollum know how much he disliked and distrusted him, but he did try to be civil. In the movies, he doesn't even try.
Jumped at the Call: Indeed, Gandalf gave him the call, seeing how eager he was.
The Lancer: To Frodo. Not only that but he's also his literal and emotional support. While the influence of the One Ring gradually eats away at Frodo's life force and mental state, Sam remains steadfastly devoted to his friend until the very end and his moral compass never wavers - even if his views (especially on Gollum) are a bit black-and-white at times.
My Girl Back Home: Rosie Cotton, who Sam brings up in the last film after they destroy the Ring. As Mount Doom erupts all around them, Sam tearfully describes her dancing and his wish to marry her. He eventually did.
Nice Guy: He's an amazing friend and is always supportive, kind and loyal.
The Power of Friendship: He uses this time and again to see Frodo's journey through.
Rage Breaking Point: Sam's hostility towards Gollum finally reaches its boiling point in Return of the King; when Gollum accuses Sam of eating the last of the lembas bread, Sam completely loses it and quite literally almost beats Gollum to death in a frenzied rage; had Frodo not intervened, he probably would have succeeded. Even he is horrified by his own actions.
Real Men Cook: Sam is the most focused on food preparation, as he travels with a frying pan, a boiling pot and a box of seasoning. He's also the toughest of the hobbits by the end of the trilogy.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red to Frodo's Blue. He's more inclined to attack anyone who dares hurt his Mr. Frodo, including Gollum who he views as more of a hindrance than an actual guide. They even have some snarking contests.
Roaring Rampage of Rescue: When he ventures into the tower of Cirith Ungol to rescue Frodo.
Sidekick: Ascended to hero.
Simple-Minded Wisdom: Sam is protected by the power of just a little hobbit common-sense.
Socially Awkward Hero: Despite his bravery in the face of danger, he's too shy to ask out Rosie and Frodo at one point has to literally push him to dance with her during Bilbo's birthday party. By the end of the third film, however, he marries her.
Supreme Chef: All hobbits can cook, and they're such gourmands one imagines that most hobbits are good cooks, but Sam is a good cook even by hobbit-reckoning. In fact, he's able to whip up a good meal with just a brace of coneys (that is, a couple of rabbits) and herbs of Ithilien.
Team Chef: He is seen cooking for the Fellowship once before Saruman's crebain fly in to look for them.
Tender Tears: More prominent than in the books.
Took a Level in Badass: Went from a timid gardener who had never wandered further than a few miles from home to maiming giant spiders and beating orcs in a fight. Lampshaded when he's beating up goblins with a frying pan in Moria, about halfway between the two: "I think I'm getting the hang of this!"
Trademark Favorite Food: Potatoes. He's genuinely baffled that Sméagol doesn't think they sound appetizing.
Undying Loyalty: Sam almost defines this trope, even when the Ring starts taking hold of Frodo.
Working-Class Hero: Out of the four main hobbits, two are the sons of chieftains (Merry and Pippin) and the other is a very wealthy heir (Frodo); Sam is the only one who is not a "gentlehobbit."