Beleaguered Assistant. Like everyone in Selina's staff, she's are completely overworked and constantly forced to put out fires. In season 4, she can't take it any longer, tells off Selina and quits.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Dan. The two of them dated for a week sometime before the series began and normally can't stomach one another, but they do occasionally seem to care about one another a bit more than most colleagues do. In Season 6, they have drunken sex offscreen, which results in Amy getting pregnant. Amy tries to nudge Dan into settling down with her and raising their child together, but when Dan remains oblivious to her advances, she decides to get an abortion.
In Season 7, after delivering a fiery rant at Selina's expense, she’s briefly overwhelmed, pausing to wonder if this is what a real orgasm feels like
Blonde Republican Sex Kitten: Basically what she becomes when she joins Jonah’s campaign.
Challenge Seeker: Very much what drives her for most of the show's run.
Deadpan Snarker: She's one of the top snarkers in the whole series, mainly since she's both the only one who is competent much of the time.
Devoted to You: As much as she tries to deny it, Amy is undeniably obsessed with Selina. Whether loyally serving at her side or fiercely opposing her as Jonah’s campaign manager, much of Amy's character centers around her near codependent relationship with Selina.
Good Girls Avoid Abortion: Zigzagged. While Amy does have an abortion after getting pregnant, it was only because Dan ignored her attempts to suggest that they settle down together.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Consistently, she is the most competent and adept member of Selina's staff.
Law of Inverse Fertility: She has drunken sex with Dan and ends up pregnant in Season 6 despite neither of them being interested in having children or having families, much less be committed to each other.
Manipulative Bitch: Her manipulations in "Special Relationship" result in Dan having a nervous breakdown and losing his position as campaign manager, with Amy getting the job.
Married to the Job:
Work seems to be much more important to Amy than her personal life. She didn't even know about her one-year anniversary with her boyfriend until he told her. Even then, she didn't care, because she had something urgent to do.
Ed: Kind of seems more appropriate now that it's just the two of us.
Amy: No, you have to go too.
Ed: Amy! It's our anniversary!
Amy: Please do not tell me you are one of those fucking weirdos that celebrates three-month-aversaries!
Ed: It's actually a year.
Amy: A year in which you neglected to tell me about Jeff Kanenote .
In Season 6, she's shown to be completely uninterested in sex with her fiancé. She only gets excited when he encourages her to rant about how much she hates his opponent, and even then she's more interested in the politics than having sex with him.
My God, What Have I Done?: In the final season, Amy plays a major role enabling the worst aspects of Jonah's presidential campaign all in the name of furthering her political career. It's not until Selinrealizess her intentions to capitalize on Jonah's popularity by making him her running mate does Amy realize the monster she helped enable.
Not Wanting Kids Is Weird: Amy is criticized by her family for not wanting children. That said, she was willing to settle down with Dan after she got pregnant with his kid, but when he remains oblivious to her advances and was already expecting her to get an abortion, she aborts. In the Distant Finale, she never had children and repeatedly states -unprompted- that it was a "good idea," making depressingly clear she’s in denial about her obvious regret.
OOC Is Serious Business: After having spent the middle of season 7 working for Jonah's campaign and trying to destroy Selina's career, Amy breaks down and begs Selina not to offer Jonah the Vice Presidency.
Pair the Spares: The Distant Finale show that she eventually marries Bill Ericcson
Screw This, I'm Out of Here!: In Season 4, when Selina brings on Karen, an useless Yes-Man to be her adviser, and values her opinions more than Amy's, Amy has a meltdown, delivers a "The Reason You Suck" Speech to both Karen and Selina and quits her job on the spot.
Significant Wardrobe Shift: After officially joining Jonah's campaign in Season 7, she appears on a talk show as a Kellyanne Conway Expy with curled hair, heavy makeup, and wearing a low-cut dress... a far cry from the simple and practical styles she had worn up until then.
Then Let Me Be Evil: Calling her "good" in the first place might be pushing it but once Amy has been pushed a bridge too far through the constant disrespect from Selina, her peers, and her having an abortion after finally giving up believing she could settle down with Dan she decides to fully back Jonah so that he can defeat Selina and potentially destroy the country.
Amy: God fuck America.
Subverted in the final episode. It backfires horribly for her
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With Dan, though she'd deny it.
Workaholic: Amy neglects her personal life for the sake of her job and it seems that she's simply unable to relax. Sue explicitly describes her as a workaholic in "Election Night":
She's a workaholic. She works frantically to avoid dealing with her weird mix of lack of self-worth and obsessive tendencies.
Working with the Ex: She and Dan dated for a week. She apparently has no fond memories of it.
Amy: It was like getting over mild food poisoning.