Berserk Button: Gary is normally a pushover, but he gets very angry when someone hurts Selina. He also flips out when Selina says that he's unimportant to her.
Beware the Nice Ones: When it's discovered Andrew is cheating on Selina, Gary screams and tries to throttle the man right in a limo.
Butt-Monkey: Treated as wimpy and an Extreme Doormat to Selina. Not as bad as Jonah, though, who he does show some annoyance at.
Gary: [During a shooter lockdown] Get to the panic room!
Sue: Every room you're in is a panic room, Gary.
Establishing Character Moment: Burns his hands holding VP Meyer's hot coffee cup while she has an idle conversation. He'll go on to do similar things in later episodes.
Extreme Doormat: He will never, ever go against Selina. He even forgives her for framing him for fraud and refuses to say one bad word about her.
Fall Guy: Unwittingly takes the fall for Andrew Meyer's activities as Director of the Meyer Fund.
Gosh Dang It to Heck!: As opposed to pretty much everyone else on the show, Gary almost never uses profanity. An example of the contrast in "Nicknames", when he and Amy tell Selina about the unflattering nicknames bloggers gave her, and he brings up VPILF:
Gary: You know what that means? Vice President I Would Like to, you know, fool around with.
Amy: Fuck.
Precision F-Strike: On the other hand, there were a few moments where Gary has been pushed to his limits that this happens, as Dana's cheese shop employee, the Statue of Liberty, and eventually Selina find out.
Green-Eyed Monster: Gary is clearly in love with Selina and gets very passive aggressive with her boyfriends.
Grew a Spine: In Season 4, after Gary makes some serious mistakes, Selina chews him out and tells him that he's unimportant to her. Gary reacts with uncharacteristic anger, reminding Selina that he's more than just her bagman.
Gary: I've broken my body for you. I've let myself to be laughed at, I've let myself to be humiliated and I'm happy to do it! Most of the time, you don't even know that I exist, but I'm fucking everything to you!
Heroic BSoD: After he walks in on Selina and Tom James having sex, he can barely walk down the hall, whimpering to himself.
Hidden Depths: He went to Cornell... and majored in hotel management.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Seems to know everything about everyone in the Washington DC political scene, including his boss. This is very useful to Selina. Has pretty much no knowledge of policy, but that's not his job.
Ignored Enamored Underling: He shows strong signs of being in love with Selina (a platonic variant, considering he was dating Dana at the time), who either doesn't notice it or doesn't care about it. Truth in Television for toxic co-dependency, with Gary obviously being the giver to Selina's taker. She frames him for Andrew's fraud shortly before being re-elected president, which gets Gary sent to jail, and she never sees him again. He still shows up to her funeral and cries at her coffin.
I Take Offense to That Last One: While playing devil's advocate, Dan predicts that Selina's policy will destroy America, capping it off by saying that she'll become so infamous that no one will ever name their child Selina again. After a stunned moment of silence, Gary says, "My God... no more Selinas?" He's immediately shushed.
Noodle Incident: Labor Day. We're never told what he did for Selina, but whatever it was, they swore themselves to secrecy. Just mentioning it is enough to get Selina to back off and apologize during an argument.
Oh, Crap!: In "Intruder", when an intruder shoots up the White House.
Gary: Shit just got real! Shit just got real!
Precision F-Strike: Usually a case of OOC Is Serious Business in either he's having an Oh, Crap! moment or he's pissed off.
When he gives Selina "The Reason You Suck" Speech in Season 4.
"I'm fucking everything to you!"
When he gives "The Reason You Suck" Speech to the rest of Selina's staff and Tom James for screwing up the election at the end of Season 5. It certainly grabs their attention, but only because they wanted to see him go off for once.
"You fuckers."
Professional Butt-Kisser: The summary of his relationship with Selina. He adores her, is extremely protective of her, and will never contradict her, but also seems to hero-worship her and consider the most beautiful woman alive, even as Selina regularly treats him like dirt.
Taking the Bullet: Well, it's actually a sneeze bullet.
Undying Loyalty: To Selina. He even breaks up with her boyfriend for her!
It comes to a head in the Grand Finale, where Selina frames him for Andrew's crimes regarding the Meyer Fund. Though he's initially hurt by her betrayal, he still attends her funeral 24 years later and holds no grudge against her.
The Un-Favorite: His parents have far more love for Bruce, Gary's stillborn twin, even keeping the crib meant for him, more than their living son who works for the President.
Took a Level in Jerkass: As the series progresses, Gary becomes increasingly cruel and mean, likely mirroring Selina's own deteriorating tendencies and frequently echoing her harsh insults. Although there remains an underlying sense of goodness within him, he consistently sides with Selina over anyone else, no matter how vicious her actions may be.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: His dad has little respect for him and his job.
What Happened to the Mouse?: His girlfriend, Dana, is never brought up again as the show goes on. According to Word of Saint Paul, Selina probably did something bad to her.