Abusive Parents: Selina's mother was cold and cruel to her, and Selina ended up treating her own daughter in much the same way.
Age Insecurity: Selina has proved many times over the series that she is incredibly insecure about her age:
Out of many incredibly sexist and derogatory nicknames that the general public have called her, she takes offense at the one which denigrates her sexual attractiveness to men.
When Catherine announces her engagement to a lobbyist, Selina just indignantly replies that she is 48. Later when Catherine and Marjorie welcome little Richard, she hems and haws about being called a grandmother.
In Season 5, she has a secret blepharoplasty operation to remove the bags from under her eyes and refuses to appear in public until she has healed from the operation. When Minna Häkkinen immediately compliments her on the cosmetic change, Selina quickly denies that she had the operation.
Selina is absolutely overjoyed when she learns that the symptoms she's been experiencing in Season 6 was a minor heart attack and not the onset of menopause, even as her doctor advises her this is much more serious and she needs a cardiac stent immediately.
She deliberately obfuscates her true age, which becomes a line of attack from Jonah Ryan's campaign by demanding that she show her birth certificate.
Mike: [announcing Selina's funeral] The former president passed away earlier this week at the age of 76 or possibly 77 or, according to some sources, 75.
All for Nothing: In the end she becomes so obsessed with becoming President that she trades away her one positive legacy in freeing Tibet, and by the time she gets in the Oval she has thoroughly alienated everyone she was once close to, including Catherine who refuses to ever speak to her again and makes good on that promise. She’s defeated by Kemi after only a single term, and then has to watch her old nemesis completely eclipse her place in history as a truly beloved female President with two terms. By the time she dies at 74, she’s such a footnote to history that the death of Tom Hanks completely overshadows her funeral on the news.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: Selina is especially attracted to sleazes and enemies. Catherine's father Andrew is a sleazy property developer always in trouble for fraud, and then there's her relationship with Tom.
Aw, Look! They Really Do Love Each Other: Deconstructed. Though she occasionally does show concern for her people, it's ultimately hollow because she'll still screw them over and ruin their lives if it benefits her.
Exemplified in the Grand Finale, where she confesses to a hospitalized Ben that she needs him because she doesn't know what to do without him, which foreshadows the ending: that she'll regret alienating her team to win the presidency, but she'll be all alone.
Also in the Grand Finale, she reluctantly has Gary take the fall for Andrew's crimes and thanks him for everything he's done for her. Yet after she becomes president, she never pardons him or even visits him in prison and they only "meet" again when Gary attends her funeral two decades later.
Be Careful What You Wish For: When she becomes President, the consequences for fuck-ups become much bigger.
Being Evil Sucks: Her selfishness, lack of scruples and desire for power at all costs end up pushing away everyone who was close to her and tarnishing her legacy, leaving her completely alone and regarded as a mediocre president who achieved nothing important or positive and her funeral such a non-event the news cuts away from it after learning that Tom Hanks passed away.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: She makes a point of being very polite and cheerful in front of cameras or voters while being much more caustic in private and viewing most voters with contempt.
Broken Pedestal: Selina idolized her father up until the events of "Chicklet", where her uncle tells her that her father was an adulturer who died having sex with his secretary and that he was involved in numerous shady financial dealings, just like Selina's ex-husband Andrew.
Can't Take Criticism: Fitting her her tendency to blame others for her mistakes, she doesn't handle criticism well.
Convenient Miscarriage: In "Baseball", she discovers that she's pregnant, much to her horror, as she's unmarried. She has a miscarriage in the very next episode.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: After spending the entire series wavering between indecision, poor choices, and relying on her equally inept staff, Selina sharpens her focus in the final episode. She embarks on a relentless and ruthless campaign to secure the presidency, disregarding the advice of everyone around her. In a bold series of moves, she manages to defeat the previously insurmountable Tom James, as well as rivals Kemi and Montez, ultimately achieving her long-coveted goal of becoming president
Corrupt Politician: Finally happens in Season 5 when she stops at nothing to buy the House vote, which includes colluding with the Chinese government.
Daddy's Girl: Selina only shows deep emotion when she remembers her beloved politician father, highlighted that she refers to her parents as "Daddy" and "Mother".
Deadpan Snarker: But only behind closed doors. Publicly, she sticks to safe (and lame) jokes.
Deceptive Legacy: Grew up thinking her father was a wonderful man who built the family fortune and her mother a cold woman who sold off Selina's beloved horse. In season 6, Selina discovers her dad was a scam artist who would have bankrupted the family if not for her mother's business smarts. Also, he was cheating on her mom with his secretary and Selina's mother kept the truth hidden, letting Selina hate her rather than ruin the image of her father.
Digging Yourself Deeper: Has a tendency to stick her foot in her mouth, and then ingest said foot, whenever she's put on the spot without preparation. Given that she's a high-ranking politician, these situations are her day job.
Easily Forgiven: By no-one but Gary. In the finale, he holds no grudge against her for sending him to prison.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: The idea of others engaging in politics or social activism because they actually want to help people and improve the country rather than simply for their own ego's or personal gain is something Selina seems legitimately unable to fathom, often being confused by Kemi Talbot's idealism or Catherine's activism.
Female Misogynist:
Selina wants to be seen as a feminist hero for being the first woman president, but privately she often makes disparaging comments about women. Showrunner David Mandel called her a "giant misogynist".
Her refusal to offer Senator Talbot (the only other female candidate for the party nomination) the VP slot stems from her belief that America doesn't want two women on the ticket. This also leads her to offer plum positions to Governor Calhoun and Jonah Ryan in exchange for their support, their delagates, and concessions like ending same-sex marriage.
Fox News Liberal: Permanently overturns gay marriage in order to win the 2020 nomination.
Freudian Excuse: Her mother, whom Selina once claimed was a "pathological narcissist" that routinely neglected and mocked her only daughter, was apparently a large source of grief for her growing up. The irony in her telling this information to Catherine is justifiably lost on Selina.note 
Girlboss Feminist: Selina wants feminist credit for being the first female president, but she doesn't actually do anything to improve women's lives and she's willing to excuse female genital mutilation if her interests demand it.
Hidden Depths: In spite of Selina being largely depicted as incompetent, she consistently has moments which show how she was able to become an accomplished Senator, mount a presidential campaign and become Vice President. 
In "Debate" she is shown to be an effective public speaker who can think on her feet.
A clip of a presidential debate shown in "Mommy Meyer" suggests that she is much better public speaker than her opponent, Bill O'Brien.
In "Congressional Ball", she ruthlessly and successfully browbeats fellow politicians to keep them in line.
In spite of Tom James' status as The Ace, in Season 5 she sees through and averts his schemes more than once.
How the Mighty Have Fallen: In Season 6, Selina's party wants nothing to do with her, she has to deal with President Montez becoming a Nobel Peace Laureate by stealing credit for Selina's accomplishments, and she's financially dependent on her daughter.
I Take Offense to That Last One: In "Nicknames," when she learns about all the various nicknames given to her by bloggers, the one she takes the greatest issue with is "Viagra Prohibitor."
They are saying that a prescription medication that is supposed to guarantee a strong and sustained erection in all men despite their age or their health is rendered ineffective by me? You know what? You no longer search on the nicknames!
Important Haircut: She gets a short haircut when she's running for President in season 3.
Informed Ability: Supposedly a politician of some repute, but with a habit of gaffes, yet on the show she appears to be clueless, surrounding herself with an even more clueless staff, and being unable to effectively engage in the kind of small talk with voters that real politicians do all the time.
It's All About Me: She tries to deny it, but it's true and it eventually becomes her defining trait as she sells out everyone and everything for her own benefit. It gets to the point where Selina can barely even understand the needs of others, especially Gary and Catherine's. In "Catherine" she says, "I know not everything is about me," to her daughter — while hiding in a closet filled with pictures, posters, and cardboard cutouts of herself.
Selina becomes incredibly incensed when she learns that Mike and his wife Wendy are trying IVF:
Selina: I can't have Mike getting what's-her-ass all knocked up and pregnant, becoming some sort of dad during my campaign.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Initially she had some Heart of Gold moments, especially with Catherine. But as the series progressed she became an increasingly terrible person and stopped showing humanity even to her daughter. And her few genuine accomplishments (like Tibet) were lucky byproducts of her terrible behavior which she later undoes to get back into office.
Karma Houdini: She gets re-elected president, selling Tibet back to the Chinese and permanently abolishes same-sex marriage, dies peacefully of old age, and is remembered somewhat fondly. However...
Karma Houdini Warranty: Although she’s remembered a little fondly, she’s lost everybody who cared about her, was kicked out of the Oval Office after only one term as President by Kemi of all people, who then proceeded to blow her out of the water and earn herself a place in history as one of the best presidents who ever lived, and when she dies, is quickly forgotten about. As a final insult, her funeral is ignored and abandoned halfway through Mike's broadcast when news breaks of Tom Hanks dying. All in all, she worked her block off and sold out everything and everybody she had for four measly years of power, and was quickly booted out in short order, rendering all she had done an exercise in futility and is quickly swept under the rug after her death.
Kick the Dog: Plenty.
In "Oslo", she promises to give back Tibet to China in exchange for China secretly helping her win the presidential election. Immediately afterwards, she meets a group of Tibetan monks who will certainly suffer horribly if Tibet is given back to China...
In the finale, she agrees to outlaw same-sex marriage to get Buddy Calhoun's delegates, annuling her daughter's marriage in the process.
It's also mentioned that she never pardoned Gary after forcing him to take the fall for Andrew's misdeeds or even contacted him afterwards, despite his years of devoted service.
Kicked Upstairs: Truth in Television, the Vice Presidential position is notorious for being a graveyard for political influence,note  with some exceptions - Al Gore, George H. W. Bush and Richard Nixon, for example. Selina is apparently not one of them.
Selina: What am I missing these days?
Senator Hallows: Power.
Kissing Under the Influence: It's implied that she had drunken sex with another woman back in college.
Lack of Empathy: As the series goes on, Selina becomes increasingly selfish and willing to do anything to gain or keep power and reaches a point where she seems genuinely unable to think of others' feelings.
Law of Inverse Fertility: As a middle-aged, divorced politician, the last thing she wants is another child, so of course she gets pregnant after having unprotected sex one time.
Lonely at the Top: Ultimately. She achieves her seemingly impossible goal of becoming President, but lost Gary, her whole staff, and Catherine and Catherine's family, with Catherine even celebrating once Selina dies.
Lonely Funeral: A variant in the finale in that her funeral is decently attended by former employees and other politicians but it's clear most are there just out of obligation and almost none are genuinely upset about Selina's death and she made so little positive or lasting impact and it's seen as such a non-event by the public that coverage is interrupted when news breaks that Tom Hanks has passed away.
Mistaken Ethnicity: Selina has been known to the public under her married name Meyer for her entire political career. Many people she meets assume that she is Jewish because Meyer is a Jewish-sounding surname, but she frequently denies being Jewish and makes the occasional conscious effort to squash any indication that she could be Jewish. According to her book A Woman First: First Woman, her ex-husband Andrew is of Jewish descent while she herself is an old money Marylander. Selina's birth name is the very Anglo-sounding "Eaton" while her mother's maiden name is "Calvert," a surname in common with one of the colonial families of Maryland.
Andrew: You know, I've long felt a deep connection with the land of Israel and their non-extradition treaty.
Selina: We're right in the middle of primaries. You can't just disappear, and I can't have people thinking I'm Jewish.
Mistaken for Racist: In "Chung", Selina is mistakenly informed that Danny Chung, the Chinese American governor of Minnesota was not born in the U.S., so she says on Meet the Press that Chung can't run for President, because he's "technically not an American".
Mrs. Robinson: Explicitly stated by Jonah, who wonders out loud how many drinks it would take for something to happen between them.
Ms. Fanservice: Zigzagged but occasionally played straight. While Selina is undeniably attractive, earlier seasons often highlighted her absurdity or off-putting behavior. However, in later seasons, this shifted as she regularly appeared in figure-flattering, low-cut outfits that emphasized her figure. This came to a head during her daughter Catherine's wedding, where Catherine was visibly uncomfortable, fearing her mother would overshadow her on her big day
Narcissist: And how. As the show goes on, Selina's ego grows exponentially and she shows that she doesn't give a shit about anything but her own power and her legacy. Especially clear in Season 6 and onwards, but it was always there - such a time when she told her neglected and emotional daughter that she "knew it wasn't all about her"...while surrounded by campaign posters showing her face.
Never My Fault: She shifts blame for any mistake on to her staff.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: A female senator who ran a campaign to be President before being shunted into an administration job by the victorious nominee? Hillary Rodham Clinton. A Vice-President from a mid-Atlantic state with a habit of unfortunate gaffes? Joe Biden.
No Party Given: Selina's party is never named, though the issues she stands for seem to be vaguely liberal, suggesting that she's a Democrat.
OOC Is Serious Business:
In "Kissing Your Sister" after the House vote is undecided and Tom James is all but certain to take the presidency, she just walks out of the Oval Office forlornly. No screaming, no blaming staff, just straight quiet to the point that it's almost a Heroic BSoD.
Her very last scene in the show is her back in the Oval Office about to complain about the "level of incompetency" that she's... no longer surrounded by, because she alienated all her friends/allies in order to get to where she was. She trails off her remark as she realizes this.
Pet the Dog:
She shows an odd concern for the well-being of the President when Kent informs her that he's resigning.
When she hears from Dan and Amy that Jonah literally shot himself in the foot, she tells Ben, who is struggling to hold in his laughter, that it isn't funny. Diminished in that she then asks Dan and Amy how this will affect her reputation.
Politically Incorrect Villain: She shows a general disdain for the poor and working class, is fatphobic, and makes a number of fairly homophobic remarks during Catherine and Marjorie's relationship. That's in addition to passing a law banning gay marriage in the finale.
Politicians Kiss Babies: In Season 7, she uses Catherine and Marjorie's baby, her grandson, while campaigning. It takes a toll on Catherine, who is suffering from postpartum depression to which Selina is unsurprisingly unsympathetic.
Power Hair: She gets a short haircut when she's running for President in season 3. Louis-Dreyfus (who wears a wig for the role) said that her own hair "does not look like hair that‘s inside the Beltway".
It comes in for a good deal of mockery.
Ben: (at Selina's second swearing-in ceremony) They're gonna have a field day with that haircut. "Thai Ladyboy Made Head of Sweatshop."
However, in season 4, after she becomes President, she lets her hair grow out again.
Pyrrhic Victory: In the Grand Finale, Selina finally becomes President, but she ended up a one term president who's only remembered for freeing Tibet, which she later undid to get the aforementioned term, and abolishing gay marriage. Worst, her administration was overshadowed by both Kemi and Splett who became two term presidents and are revered as two of the finest ever to hold the office. She gave up her allies, daughter, and Gary, for the Oval Office, and had nothing to show for it in the end, being such a footnote in history that press coverage of her funeral is abandoned halfway through when news breaks that Tom Hanks has passed away. Naturally. Permanently overturning gay marriage just to further her own career was the final nail that pushed Catherine away from her forever.
Rich Bitch: Selina likes to think she's a "woman of the people", but deep down she loathes the people and is extremely snobby and rude to literally everyone.
The Scapegoat: Essentially her role for the President and the rest of the administration when a major scandal comes along. Even when Selina actually accomplishes something spectacular, like successfully negotiating the budget talks with the House majority leader in order to avoid a government shutdown, POTUS stalls on the deal and lets the shutdown happen in order to take attention away from the hostage crisis blowout where one of them was a CIA spy, thereby blaming Selina.
Ben: Madam Vice President, greatest respect, but it has been the job of the VP over the ages to, you know, take it in the ass to save the President.
Sir Swears-a-Lot: Her filthy mouth was noted by several reviewers.
Skewed Priorities: When Selina learns that her exhaustion was a mild heart attack, she's overjoyed because it means that she's not experiencing menopause.
Slave to PR: Selina's stance on any issue will be determined by what impression it will have in the media.
Small Name, Big Ego: Despite having been President, she still qualifies. Since she was the first female President, even though she came into that role by pure chance, she acts like she was a trailblazer whose time in office had a revolutionary effect on the country and deserves to be mentioned alongside Lincoln and Washington even though she only served a year which was marked by various fuck ups and scandals and generally seen as an embarrassment and one of the worst US Presidents in history, enough that Ben bluntly tells her she has basically no chance of being elected again.
The Un-Favourite: To the administration. In season 1, her main project is a "clean jobs" bill, which she eventually has to veto personally, when the President pulls his support. In season 2, the President gives her a more prominent role in foreign policy, only to throw her under the bus when a major scandal comes along.
The Unfettered: As the series goes on, Selina has fewer and fewer scruples, to the point of being willing to do anything to gain and keep power, no matter who is hurt in the process.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Selina was never portrayed as likable, but she had some humanizing moments in the earlier seasons and at least some principles. By season 6, there are no such moments and her behavior is close to sociopathy.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: Selina is selfish, shallow, amoral and incompetent. She does not seem to have any political convictions; all she cares about is how she appears before the voters. She's also a Mean Boss and as a parent, she's either neglectful or outright abusive.
Upper-Class Equestrian: She's from a very privileged background. Growing up she had a beloved pony, and she still resents her mother for selling it.
Upper-Class Twit: The media makes her out to be this due to her over-privileged background, especially after a quote in her book about how she learned about the tough life of American farmers through grooming her pony as a child. Saturday Night Live even does a sketch about this... and then Meyer turns up in a follow-up one (Dreyfus was in fact in SNL herself)
Selina: So I had a horse as a kid, who didn't? Have a pet, is what I meant.
Selina also says that you shouldn't be a millionaire at a young age: "You shouldn't make your first million until you're in your thirties. That's what Andrew and I did and it kept us completely grounded."
Was It Really Worth It?: She's forced to ask herself this in the finale as she is elected President but has pushed away everyone to do so. Her reaction indicates that she doesn't think so.
What You Are in the Dark: At the end of the Grand Finale, after alienating herself from her allies, she only realizes what this means when finds herself alone in the Oval Office.
Woman Scorned: In the middle of her divorce with Andrew, she torched his car and got away with it.
You Have Outlived Your Usefulness: Repeatedly throughout the series, Selina had a penchant for firing or sacking a member of her staff the moment she feels she no longer needs them. The *only* member of her staff who Selina seems to truly value is Ben.