The Artifact: His plot relevance in the back half of season 3 is greatly reduced, with Nathaniel assuming the post of Rebecca's Love Interest and Josh being more of a Plucky Comic Relief, only loosely related to other character's stories. He regains prominence in season 4.
Asian Airhead: "Asian bro" Josh is not an idiot, but he tends to be slow on the uptake.
Berserk Button: Josh is normally extremely mellow, even scared of conflict. Threaten his family, though, and that changes in a hurry.
Betty and Veronica:
Zig-Zagged. He is the "prize" that Rebecca is attempting to be with, making him a Veronica. However, Josh is also far more good-natured, open and friendly with her on a surface level than Greg is, giving him the qualities of a Betty. However, Josh tends to make every situation he's in revolve around himself, shows serious signs of narcissistic personality disorder, and is in-general a rather terrible boyfriend, which pushes him back into Veronica territory.
In the second half of season 2, Josh is a more straightforward Betty (friendly and engaged to be married to Rebecca) compared to Nathaniel's antagonistic, cold, high-status Veronica.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: An extremely interesting example. Every single one of Josh's Nice Guy tendencies is 100% genuine. He really is that friendly and positive and is genuinely not mean-spirited at all. However, Josh's narcissistic tendencies, Manchild behavior, and Commitment Issues make any relationship with Josh that goes past the surface level extremely unpleasant and leads to an incredibly large amount of Jerkass behavior from Josh towards those around him.
Brainless Beauty: Downplayed. He's good looking but is also pretty oblivious and naive about most things outside of his comfort zone.
Broken Ace: Handsome, popular and genuinely friendly, but also believes himself to be unprepared for adult life and has surprisingly low self-esteem as a result.
Character Development: After Josh goes into therapy, he's still inclined to be insufferably self-absorbed, but he becomes much more acute about other people's issues, and completely nails why Paula is scared to study for her exams.
Chick Magnet: He's been popular with women since high school, and is considered the ladies' man of his friend group. He's able to remain in denial about how serious Rebecca's feelings are for him because, in his words, "most chicks I know are a little into me."
Childhood Friends: He and Greg have known each other since they were five.
Childhood Friend Romance: He and Valencia have been dating since they were eleven, and have likely known each other for even longer than that.
Commitment Issues:
Josh is reluctant to settle down with any woman he dates, often coming up with excuses as to why it's their fault and not his fault. With Valencia, who he dated for fifteen years, he blamed her for being overly-controlling and cited his unresolved feelings for Rebecca (which didn't start until the last few months of their fifteen year relationship). With Rebecca, he cited her personal, mental, and emotional issues as well as a sudden calling to become a priest.
Additionally, Josh quickly abandoned the lifelong commitment to become a priest as well when just how serious the commitment was became clear to him.
Dumb Jock: Josh isn't very smart, but he is incredibly athletic, has several black belts, and is a very good dancer.
Fatal Flaw: Immaturity. Josh is a Manchild pushed into adulthood by everyone around him. He dislikes commitments, responsibilities, not being the center of attention and hates the fact that things are changing around him. He is specially weak to his own guilt, and rather than making up for what he has done, he only wants to relieve himself from that guilt in the easiest way possible, these all combine in why he left Rebecca at the altar (he didn't wanted to commit, didn't liked to work in the wedding and ran away to be a priest, because he believed that then all of his problems would be solved by themselves and holy forgiveness would relief him).
Firemen Are Hot: Partway through Season 3, he finds a new job that he describes as something along the lines of a volunteer firefighter. He's really a dancer at a gay bar that wears a fireman outfit.
Full-Name Basis: Because his name is so simplistic and he hangs out with a guy called "White Josh," he gets called "Josh Chan" a lot.
Future Loser: Downplayed. He is suggested to have been the Big Man on Campus during high school, and while he's still generally popular and happy in the present, he does not appear to have any real plans for his future and is content with keeping his life as close to how it was in high school as possible.
Green-Eyed Epiphany: Late in season 1, he starts having complex feelings towards Rebecca after learning that she and Greg are an item. This is not helped by Valencia pressuring him to propose to her.
Hates Being Alone: The season 2 song "Thought Bubbles" is about how Josh finds it very difficult to be alone with his thoughts, which explains why he is so sociable and outgoing but which also implies that he's not nearly as happy and content as he (and everyone else) likes to think he is.
Henpecked Husband: Played With. Early on, he appears to be a non-married example towards Valencia. She has an iron grip on his friendships and controls almost everything he does. Later on as it reveals that he has inadvertently been the one straining their relationship due to his refusal to take the next step in their relationship.
Hope Bringer:
Regardless of how their relationship is interpreted, Josh's reappearance in Rebecca's life is what caused her to abandon her career in pursuit of genuine happiness, and his presence serves as a constant source of inspiration for her not to give up.
Subverted towards the end of Season 2 and Season 3, where Josh's role in Rebecca's life and his treatment of her is the final straw to pushing her on a downward spiral.
Ignored Epiphany: Played with. When it's pointed out that he uses women to flee away from trouble and guilt in his life, he genuinely takes it to heart. Unfortunately, he doesn't really understand that the issue is the fact that he's running away from his problems, rather than the specific method he chooses. As such, while he does resist the temptation to use the girl he just met as a distraction in the Season 2 finale, he instead decides to go join the priesthood.
Intrusive Thoughts: The song "Thought Bubbles" is essentially a musical Imagine Spot about how apparent himbo Josh Chan actually comes across as a Brainless Beauty because he cannot be left alone with his thoughts, as they invariably lead towards a dark path so he tries to stay untroubled and not think about... well, pretty much anything, ideally.
It's All About Me: As said above, Josh shows several signs of narcissistic personality disorder. While he's not exactly domineering, he generally expects to being the center of attention. He often blames his problems on other people, refuses to take responsibility for his mistakes, and is almost solely focused on his own feelings, while not registering those of others. After he leaves Rebecca at the alter and she angrily rants about all the insane things she's done to be with him, his immediate reaction is relief, because he doesn't have to feel guilty about leaving her. In the Season 3 midseason finale, Josh takes Rebecca's suicide attempt and still warps it into being all about him. He's frequently called out on this behavior, and he does finally seem to be getting it.
In Love with Love: Downplayed, but in season 4, Rebecca correctly realizes that his feelings for her are more because he's now ready to be in a serious relationship.
Jerkass: Unintentionally so on his part, but very much still an example. Josh tends to be self-absorbed, petty, and immature in any and all situations, leading him to be extremely unpleasant in a large amount of situations (particularly if they're about someone else and not him).
Kick the Dog: His leaving Rebecca literally hours before their wedding to become a priest and leading her to almost commit suicide comes across as a truly epic example of this.
Last-Name Basis: Is called "Chan" semi-regularly, likely due to being close friends with another Josh.
Lovable Jock: He is genuinely friendly, happy and unassuming most of the time, and it takes a lot to shake his resolve.
Manchild: Josh has had a hard time growing up and getting a job. Additionally, his approach to relationships tends to be extremely childish and immature.
A Man Is Always Eager: When he was in a bad mood, he turned down Valencia's advances. He genuinely didn't even know it was possible for a man to turn down sex.
Mr. Fanservice: Due to Rebecca's obsession with him, his good looks are talked about constantly. After his chiseled physique is steadily hyped up throughout the first season, he is finally given an extended Shirtless Scene during the finale.
Nice Guy: Even though Josh is handsome and popular, he's also shown to be nice and friendly to pretty much everyone. His ability to consistently treat Rebecca nicely and as a friend is what causes her to continue to obsess over him.
Oblivious to Love: The dude simply cannot understand Rebecca's feelings. After finding out Rebecca is moving back to New York immediately after he decides he can't be with her, he's still wondering "why would she leave?"
Odd Friendship: He and Greg couldn't be any more different from each other, but have remained strong friends for over two decades.
OOC Is Serious Business: Whenever he's not cheerful and happy, it's a sign something is wrong. This is commented on In-Universe.
On the Rebound: Hooks up with Rebecca and starts having a relationship with her (she thinks it's serious, very clearly; he considers it to be casual sex and it gives him a place to live) less than an hour after breaking-up with his girlfriend of fifteen years Valencia.
The Pollyanna: He's usually happy. Darryl even calls him "the happy man" and considers it particularly worrisome if Josh isn't happy.
Sexy Priest: Left Rebecca at the altar to enter a seminary at the very end of Season 2. It doesn't take long for him to get bored with the process, and Rebecca showing up and spilling her crazy is all the excuse he needs to quit.
Turn to Religion: Goes through a bout of this after realising that he doesn't want to marry Rebecca after all and leaving her at the altar. While religion had always been important to him, he was inspired by the certainty felt by a priest friend of his and believed that if he joined the priesthood, too, he'd know what he was meant to do in life. However, even early on his friend suspected he was just using the priesthood as a way to run away from his problems, something quickly proven (and through a rather snazzy musical number to boot) once he joins up and realises it requires a lot of quiet studying he was not at all prepared for. After a few episodes, he quits.
What Is This Feeling?: After seeing Rebecca with Greg, he gets really angry and since he's The Pollyanna, he has no idea why or even what he's feeling. It would be Is This What Anger Feels Like? but the concept is so foreign to him that he doesn't even know it's anger.