Abusive Parents: Rebecca's mother is extremely controlling of her and blames her for her father walking out on them.
Aesop Amnesia: On multiple occasions Rebecca realizes what a fool she's been and tries to let go of Josh. Unfortunately, this rarely lasts for more than a couple episodes before she reverts to her old ways.
Affectionate Nickname: Paula calls her "Cookie" and Josh calls her "Becks".
Always Someone Better: Consistently outperformed Audra Levine throughout their lives. Audra only achieved her high-powered junior executive position at her firm because Rebecca opted out of it to travel to West Covina.
Ambiguously Bi: Parodied with the song 'Feeling Kinda Naughty', where Rebecca isn't quite sure whether she has a crush on Valencia or is just insanely jealous of her. She even kisses her on the lips! This is acknowledged when she talks with Darryl's ex wife in season 3, in which she says though she isn't bi, she does has bi tendencies and puts herself in a 1.8 in the Kinsey Scale (which would be technically bisexuality).
Angsty Surviving Twin: Played for laughs. Rebecca squicks out Paula by casually mentioning that one of the reasons she doesn't have much of a family is that she ate her twin in the womb.
Paula: You ate your twin?
Rebecca: I mean, medically speaking, I didn't "eat" it, I just metabolized its body parts for my own use.
Affably Evil: One way to look at her character, especially if you do it objectively. She's an intelligent, friendly, charming lady who genuinely cares for her friends and will usually try to help you out, who just so happens to be a crazy, clingy, ruthless stalker.
Arbitrarily Large Bank Account: Subverted. She spends massive sums of money at least Once an Episode throughout most of the first season, seemingly without any sort of financial trouble, until she eventually comes to the realization that all of her big spending has left her broke. This leads to a small scale Continuity Cavalcade as every time she spent a large amount of money earlier in the season is brought up.
The Atoner: Part of her arc in season four. She initially accepts going to prison for her crimes but later recognizes it as performative and starts genuinely working on herself and making amends.
"Basic Instinct" Legs-Crossing Parody: On the advertising - she's the page image for the trope.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Nathaniel in late season 3. An entire song is dedicated to it.
Betty and Veronica: Played with. Rebecca clearly sees herself as the Betty figure, being the more "plainly pretty" "girl next door" type, and utterly intimidated by the striking and icy Valencia. But from Valencia's perspective, Rebecca is a high-powered, Ivy League-educated lawyer from New York who came sweeping into their small town to manipulate her boyfriend away from her, which sounds a lot more like the Veronica figure. Somewhat acknowledged, when Paula can’t decide which one of them is the “Taylor Swift” and which is the “Katy Perry” in their feud over Josh, referencing the two then-feuding pop stars' contrasting imagesnote .
Big Eater: She likes to eat and makes no bones about it, frequently mentioning her love of donuts and bagels.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Zig-Zagged. Rebecca is generally nice and pleasant, but she is also extremely manipulative when she need something. She has a Heel Realization late in the first season when she realizes her status as this. That said, she also is actually a pretty nice person a lot of the time. The opening song for Season Four discusses the trope, with the song showing a montage of scenes showing her as The Cutie and then another showing her as a Psycho Ex-Girlfriend, before concluding that people can't be put into a clear box of "good" or "bad".
Black-and-White Insanity: She doesn't seem to handle gray areas well — part of what makes the Josh situation so awful is that she doesn't seem to get that neither she nor Josh is really 100% right or wrong here.
Brainy Brunette: Rebecca is a brunette with considerable intelligence.
Broken Ace: Rebecca is a great lawyer, a graduate of Harvard and Yale, and knows Mandarin. She was going to be made partner in her old, prestigious law firm. However, inside, she is a mass of self-doubt, self-hate, anxiety, and depression. When she screws things up with Josh, she ends up singing the song "You Stupid Bitch" to herself, even saying that she's done this a lot.note 
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: At least half-literally: Even in New York, she had made partner before she decided to move to West Covina; in West Covina, what little we do see of her actually working shows that her knowledge of real estate law is unparalleled. However, the show is mostly about her outside of work, and occasionally how her personal issues steamroll very quickly into her work.
Buxom Beauty Standard: Characters are constantly commenting on Rebecca's large bust, with even Valencia complimenting Rebecca on her appearance. Even before Josh falls in love with her, he makes sure to highlight how great her boobs are. Defied with the song 'Heavy Boobs' where Rebecca deconstructs this trope.
Byronic Hero: Despite being a deeply flawed human being she is still for the most part a kindhearted person.
Character Development: In some ways, the entire point of the show. Rebecca in season one has wild mood swings between serious depression and manic cheerfulness, which are part of what make her such an engaging character, but as she show goes on she is revealed to have serious mental health issues. Over the course of seasons two and three, she comes to accept this about herself. By season four, she's handling things in a much healthier way. Very realistically, she still goes into emotional tailspins and makes terrible decisions, but she recognizes this and deals with it much more quickly than she did in the beginning.
Cheerful Child: Flashbacks show that she was this until she started to get the impression that nobody loved her. Even when puberty hands her massive frizzy hair, a dental retainer and acne:
Silas Bunch: What happened to your hair?
Young Rebecca: Oh, certain hormonal changes have occurred. It's unfortunate, but such is life.
Color Motif:
Blue. She often wears blue in her musical numbers ("West Covina", "Let's Generalize About Men"), or has some sort of blue color around her ("You Stupid Bitch", "The End of the Movie"). She is introduced wearing a blue dress with a black blazer. Blue is a color often associated with deep sadness, which is what she is feeling most of the time and mirrors her unhappiness with her life.
In early season 3, she invokes this and decides to go in Light Is Not Good direction by dressing in white and painting her hair black, making her new color scheme focus on white, with some splashes of black, though she soon drops this and goes back to her more usual blue-scheme.
Rebecca: My hair is dark, because I'm evil, but I'm wearing white, because it's ironic.
D-Cup Distress: The theme of "Heavy Boobs." Her large bust causes her all kinds of problems.
Deadpan Snarker:
Dream Ghost Dr. Akopian: What were your other relationships like after that?
Rebecca: With other men? Oh, my god, they were fantastic. They were beautiful, filled with respect and mutual orgasms. [withering stare] What do you think? They were disasters.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Rebecca is the classic romantic comedy heroine taken to her logical extreme, with a shitload of mental issues mixed in. Turns out rom-com antics aren't nearly as cute when they're being done in real life by a manipulative Stalker with a Crush...
Desperately Craves Affection: Rebecca is desperate for affection and love and will cling intensely to anyone who shows her either, regardless of what she has to do to get it.
Disappeared Dad: Rebecca's dad left them when she was a teenager. She still tries to have a relationship with him, even though he's a complete deadbeat. She finally tells him to fuck off in the season two finale.
Ditzy Genius: Despite being an Ivy League graduate and a genius lawyer, Rebecca tends to make hasty, careless and downright idiotic decisions in her day to day life.
Driven to Suicide:
In season 2 finale, she has a breakdown following Josh leaving her at the altar, which leads her to run away to a cliff with the intent to run. Fortunately, Paula manages to talk her down from it.
She eats a whole bottle of anti-anxiety meds with the purpose to commit suicide. Last minute, though, she asks for the help of a flight attendant and they manage to get her to a hospital.
Dude Magnet: Josh, Greg, Nathaniel, Trent, several minor characters, possibly Heather... Rebecca gets a lot of romantic and sexual attention. (It's all but stated that she's quite promiscuous when she's single, too, and has no issues finding partners.) However, her craziness or outside forces often drive them off. (Except Trent, much to her dismay.) Occasionally lampshaded by guys observing her odd behavior.
Hector: Dude, why are all my friends in love with this girl?
Elite School Means Elite Brain: For all her mental instability, Harvard and Yale alumna Rebecca is considered a highly promising lawyer, and was just about to be promoted to firm partner at a relatively young age before she throws it all away to follow her crush to a small city across the country. She is noted to be overqualified for the eventual lawyer job she does take up in West Covina.
Expository Hair Style Change:
While in New York, Rebecca's hair was straight and perfectly groomed. When she settles into West Covina, she wears it in its natural curls, showing how much happier and more open she is in her new life.
In season three, she dyes her hair a much darker shade of brown after Josh leaves her at the altar.
The Fake Cutie: Likes to portray herself as a bubbly Ingenue, but, while genuinely a pretty nice person, she is in actuality far more savvy, manipulative and vindictive than she lets on.
False Friend: Becomes Valencia's best friend for a period of time in order to become closer to Josh. Rebecca herself denies it throughout the episode that it happens in, only to finally acknowledge it in the end, completely destroying her relationship with Valencia in the process. Subverted, as they do become genuine friends later on.
Fatal Flaw: The belief that true love will solve all her problems. Rebecca's quest for the "right" relationship takes precedence over anything else in her life, which allows her to excuse some really manipulative and downright cruel behavior. Add impulsivity and a flair for drama, and she manages to mistreat pretty much everyone, not least of all herself, over the course of the series in her relentless pursuit of love.
Fish Out of Water: She's a born and bred New Yorker who moves to a much smaller city in Southern California.
Freudian Excuse: She grew up with an emotionally abusive mother who relentlessly insulted and criticized her and a father who abandoned her and has made it clear he doesn't care very much about her. Unsurprisingly, this left Rebecca desperate for any kind of affection or love and willing to do anything to achieve it.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: After Nathaniel (in song form) argues that both of them were messed up by their childhoods, and therefore nothing is their fault, Rebecca realizes that she needs to stop using that excuse and take responsibility for her own actions.
Genki Girl: Rebecca is the grown up version of this; she tends to start things out innocently enough but tends to take things way too far.
Guy on Guy Is Hot: She certainly thinks so, as one of the many distractions she gets sucked into during "Time to Seize the Day" is masturbating to gay porn.
Heel Realization: Rebecca isn't necessarily a bad person but her actions can be very harmful to herself and others. She occasionally has moments of clarity where she realizes just how badly she hurts other people. This is explored in the song "I'm a Villain in My Own Story" where she comes to see herself as a Villain Protagonist. In season four, she has a more firm one after manipulating Pamala into committing felonies, and tries to dedicate herself to becoming a better person.
Hello, Attorney!: When Rebecca's in court on TV because she's fighting the water case, and the others are watching, even Heather murmurs "I'd bang that gavel."
Hollywood Tone-Deaf: In the real world (as opposed to the show's fantasy musical numbers), Rebecca's singing is quite pitchy and bad, and much worse than Rebecca thinks it is.
Hope Bringer: Becomes this to Josh over time, as her unyielding love and belief in him fills him with feelings of confidence in himself for the first time in his life. It leads to him entering a Heroic BSoD after she tries to move on from him.
I Call Him "Mister Happy": She's named her breasts "Bonnie" and "Clyde," and her ovaries "Hustle" and "Flow."
I Just Want to Be Loved: YES. Rebecca's defining trait is her desire to find true love... and how far she'll go to get it.
Improbable Age: While it's not impossible for a person to be offered the position of junior partner at a high profile New York law firm in their mid-twenties, it is certainly uncommon. This is one of the earliest indicators of Rebecca's exceptional intelligence, as well as her excessive devotion to things that interest her.
Irrational Hatred: Rebecca is pretty clearly shown to possess a thinly-veiled disgust of White Josh for no clear reason. In particular, she mentions that she finds his shirtless physique disgusting and compares his face to a chipmunk. This is especially confusing given that one of White Josh's defining character traits is his uncanny resemblance to Josh, the person who Rebecca is obsessed with.
It's All About Me: Rebecca is very impulsive and will do almost anything to be with Josh, without taking into consideration how others might feel about her behavior. Even after she gets over that obsession, she's still got a clear selfish streak.
Ivy League for Everyone: Rebecca graduated from Harvard and Yale. Justified, in that she's repeatedly shown to be both incredibly hard-working (when she's motivated to be) and prodigiously gifted as a lawyer.
Jewish American Princess: She has the upbringing of one, at least. She even gets involved in a "JAP battle" with her lifelong rival and fellow Jewish American Princess.
Jewish and Nerdy: A gifted lawyer with an Ivy League pedigree as well as Jewish heritage.
Love Hungry: Rebecca is desperate for love and affection, and isn't above manipulating and deceiving people in order to get it — albeit, not without guilt. The crux of her Character Development is this trait, and how she goes from denying it, to embracing it, to growing out of it.
Loving a Shadow: Much of her feelings for Josh can best be described as this, as he was the symbol of a happier and more carefree time in her life and she projects that desire onto him in the hopes that getting back with him will fix her problems. Naturally, it doesn't work that way and Rebecca learns that she has to address the real sources of her unhappiness and stop seeing Josh as a solution, especially because he has a large number of flaws himself.
Manipulative Bitch: A more sympathetic example than most. Rebecca is damn good at getting what she wants and engineering situations to work in her favor. But she's not infallible, and it comes back to bite her later on.
Mirror Character: Rebecca has Trent, her own obsessed ex, who shares many of her own flaws and tries many of the same tricks to get with her that she does to win back Josh. Trent is necessary to the audience realizing the antagonist Valencia is actually quite right in her assessment of Rebecca.
Money Dumb: Rebecca is hinted to be one through the early episodes, wasting money without thinking about it, then it's confirmed in the Broke Episode of the first season. She was earning so much money in her previous job she never had to worry about managing it, and when she accepted a job with a much lesser pay, she soon went broke.
Ms. Fanservice: The concept of Fanservice in general is often parodied by her several times during musical numbers, which show her in provocative outfits only to juxtapose it with something decidedly unsexy, such as having to be helped on with a pair of Spanx. Sometimes played completely straight, prominently in Season 1 where scenes prominently focus on her large breasts.
Never My Fault: In an odd combo of this and It's All My Fault, Rebecca seems to swing back and forth between believing everything is her fault, and that nothing is.
Nice Girl: Subverted. Rebecca would like to believe she is one, and she is incredibly friendly, helpful and supportive to people she likes. She genuinely always wants to do the right thing, even when her actions don't match up. On the occasions when she realizes just how harmful she can be to others, she lapses into a Heroic BSoD. However, she's too manipulative and too much of a Stepford Smiler to be a truly straight example.
Normal Fish in a Tiny Pond: She was already a pretty big fish in New York, where she was offered a junior partner position at a prestigious law firm in her mid-twenties, with her employers showing a willingness to out-bid competitors to keep her under them. In West Covina, though, she's unquestionably the best lawyer in town. Even her boss hires her to represent him in his custody case. And she's in real estate.
Politically Correct Villain: A Villain Protagonist and a manipulative, petty and fixated stalker who prides herself for being progressive and giving annual donations. By Season 4, the Villain Protagonist is averted.
Psycho Ex-Girlfriend: Implied from the title, but ultimately subverted. Rebecca may be pretty fixated on Josh, but her problems with needing to be liked go back much further. If it wasn't Josh, it would have been something else. That said, she did end up crossing into the trope in season three before a My God, What Have I Done? realisation.
Sanity Slippage: Starting mid-season two and especially season three, Rebecca's grip of reality and common sense is slowly but surely going out the window. Not that she was ever a pinnacle of sanity to begin with, mind you.
Screw the Rules, I Have Money!: When told that no matter how much she donates to Josh's camp program, she will never get a position as a camp counselor, Rebecca writes a cheque and hands it to the camp director, who stares at it wide-eyed for a moment and then says "This'll do. Welcome aboard."
Downplayed in later seasons because she stops being a lawyer and starts running her own business selling pretzels. By season four she's resigned to not having much money anymore, but also has learned not to impulsively spend money she doesn't have and ratchet up debt.
Selective Obliviousness: This is how Rebecca's disorder most prominently manifests. She constantly denies that she moved to West Covina to date Josh or that she even wants to date Josh, before running across town to "spontaneously" bump into him at a location he checked into on Facebook.
Sizable Semitic Nose: Darryl is surprised to learn Rebecca is Jewish, as she has a "tiny" nose.
Darryl: It's like a button.
Rebecca: ...Thank you.
Slasher Smile: She has a prominent one on her face whenever she's doing something devious and/or exciting. It's more adorable than terrifying, though.
Soapbox Sadie: She's prone to lecturing people on the latest progressive ethics, and once wondered why the Hispanic chefs at a Mexican restaurant weren't more insulted by the menu not being authentically Mexican enough. She's not necessarily portrayed as wrong most of the time, but people don't usually listen to her - and of course it doesn't help that she's rarely able to practice what she preaches.
Stalker with a Crush: She is this, despite her insistence that she isn't one for Josh Chan. She's not above knowing where Josh is at all times and following him for her own ends.
Stepford Smiler: She's quite energetic and friendly which covers up the fact that she suffers from some very serious issues.
Straw Feminist: Downplayed, as self-proclaimed feminist Rebecca is the hero of the show and usually framed as having valid points. However, there are satirical moments when she throws around feminist buzzwords for clearly disingenuous reasons, like when she accuses her therapist of 'mansplaining' when he diagnoses her with BPD.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Has been on the receiving end of this from several characters who get fed up with her antics. Including an epic one from herself.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Season 2 generally portrays her as being much more self-absorbed, abrasive and whiny than she was in season 1. Justified, as it's suggested that she's always been like this and the audience is only now seeing it as a result of the Protagonist-Centered Morality that surrounded season 1 starting to slip away.note 
Trademark Favorite Food: Pretzels, though less because of the food itself and more because they're a symbol of her happiness in West Covina, which two pretzels lampshade in this song.
Ultimate Job Security: Played with. Rebecca does a lot of extreme things that would likely face repercussions in real life, such as skipping work on a whim or acting inappropriately at meetings, but continues to stay on at the firm. However, when she is serious about her work, she's a brilliant lawyer who gets things done. Part of this is because her background makes her one of the best lawyers working in West Covina despite her issues. Working with a boss like Darryl also helps.
Finally subverted in Season 4. Even though the charges ended up getting dropped, the fact that she was sent to jail means that it's up to the bar association whether or not she gets to continue practicing law.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: Deconstructed with extreme precision. Much of the show is from Rebecca's POV, so she sees herself as the romantic heroine who just wants to find love, and to whom bad things happen because other people are mean to her. Increasingly, as the show goes on, she is shown to be her own worst enemy, not because she's a villain, or even all that unsympathetic, but because she has serious personal problems that regularly cause her to behave like an asshole towards the people around her. She is intermittently aware of this, but one of her problems is self-hatred, so she's a poor judge of when she's doing the right thing and when she isn't. Even when she is being nice, it's implied that she is doing so for the wrong reasons (see "Well Done, Daughter!" Girl).
The Vamp: While it's not her primary characteristic, Rebecca is very comfortable with trying to leverage her sexuality to get things done and is quick to try that tactic whenever more dignified methods fails - Rachel Bloom has stated in so many words that Rebecca associates sex with power. Parodied in that she's always extremely unsubtle in her flirting, compared to the artful way most versions of this trope go about it - in a sense, she's an Unskilled, but Strong Vamp.
Villain Protagonist: By season three, she's definitely this. While she's still sympathetic, engaging, and likable, it's clear that she's not the good guy here, and that Josh was perfectly justified in leaving her. The song "After Everything You Made Me Do" seems designed to highlight this. Once you hear all of Rebecca's misdeeds up until that point listed out, one after the other, it becomes a lot harder to deny the fact that she's a manipulative, petty, crazy stalker.
Averted in season four, where she's accepted that she needs to take responsibility for her own bad actions and, also, that she's got borderline personality disorder, and shouldn't excessively blame herself for things that aren't her fault. She becomes a much more stable and less manipulative person.
Weight Woe: She is self-conscious about her weight, to the point of calling herself "fatty" whenever she falls into one of her bouts of self-pity. This is suggested to be the result of her mother's overly-critical parenting style.
"Well Done, Daughter!" Girl:
Rebecca always tries to impress her mom. Paula calls her a "level-5 mom pleaser".
As bad as her relationship with her mom is, her relationship with her father is even worse. While Rebecca recognizes how awful her mother is, she still adores her dad even after he abandoned her. It takes until the end of Season 2 for her to see him for the neglectful, selfish deadbeat he is.
Womanchild: It's implied that Rebecca hasn't matured much past her teen years.
Wrong Genre Savvy: She sees herself as the heroine of a romantic comedy, where Josh is the love interest and they're (eventually) going to live happily ever after. She's unfortunately in a deconstruction of one, so her efforts never pay off the way she wants them to.