A-Cup Angst: During one of their earlier bonding sessions with Rebecca, Valencia confides that she actually feels quite insecure about her smaller breasts, while expressing jealousy of Rebecca's bustier figure, and has often thought about getting implants. But she eventually changes her mind when Rebecca explains that having a large bust isn't all it’s cracked up to be.
Alpha Bitch: She often acts like an adult version of a high school queen bee, especially in the first season. She has no Girl Posse to speak of as she can't help rivaling and intimidating other women. Josh's (mostly male) friends can barely put up with her.
Background Halo: When Valencia forgives Josh for kissing Rebecca, she stands up in front of a big picture of the Virgin Mary and, naturally enough, acquires one of these.
Betty and Veronica: Played with. While she's the strikingly beautiful ice queen in contrast to the pretty but less glamourous and friendly Rebecca, she is also Josh's childhood friend who has earnestly waited her entire life for him to propose to her, giving her traits of both a Veronica and a Betty.
Big Bad: Deconstructed and Subverted. She's Rebecca's primary obstacle in wooing Josh, but her status as a villain is completely dependent on the assumption that Rebecca is "meant to be" with Josh, something that the show repeatedly addresses. She comes off as vain and controlling, but never actually does anything wrong. It gradually becomes obvious that, from Valencia's perspective, Rebecca is trying to manipulate and seduce her boyfriend, breaking up a 15 year relationship. In season 2, as she gets more screen time and development, her previous demeanor seems much more justified, and Rebecca's earlier actions feel increasingly awful.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Used to be this before changing her ways. Combined with Selective Obliviousness, gives the following:
Josh: [after the gang has been to a movie about a cancer patient] I totally relate to Chad, the sensitive jock who eats clean and journals hard.
Hector: Yeah, and I'm so the bad-boy rich kid who sleeps with that hot girl in remission.
Valencia: And I am so exactly like that caring nurse who donated her bone marrow.
Greg: You didn't feel any connection to the vain yoga instructor?
Valencia: [stony stare] She was fat.
Childhood Friend Romance: She and Josh have been together since they were eleven, and have likely known each other for even longer.
Clingy Jealous Girl: Forbids Josh from having female friends due to a fear of having them try to steal him from her. She's actually not wrong, since that's exactly what Rebecca is trying to do.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Starting in Season 2, Episode 5, she starts bonding with Rebecca and she becomes friends with her and Heather.
Do Not Call Me "Paul": She changed her first name from Maria to Valencia.
Even the Girls Want Her: Rebecca can't help but acknowledge her beauty and sex appeal. It's one of the many reasons why she hates her.
Fallen Princess: As of her breakup with Josh at the end of season 1.
Female Misogynist: Valencia sees other women as competition who are just jealous of the attention she gets from men. "Women Gotta Stick Together" is almost nothing but her insulting or berating other women. She gets better.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Subverted. None of Josh's friends really like Valencia because they can see how self-centered she is. She in turn doesn't have female friends, because she feels threatened by them. By season 2, she has realized this about herself and is doggedly trying to become friends with Rebecca and Heather.
Happy Dance: After Josh tells her he's finally going to look for an engagement ring. Valencia does a good job at staying calm and subdued in her happiness... until Josh leaves the room. See for yourself.
Happily Married: with Beth, at the end.
Hate Sink: Deconstructed. Her unlikable personality makes it much easier for the audience to take Rebecca's side in their feud when, in reality, Rebecca is the sole person responsible for their feud existing at all. By season 2, she's mellowed out somewhat and has become much more sympathetic.
Heartbreak and Ice Cream: After her broken engagement with Josh she buries her pain in pastries. She gains a tiny amount of weight but for her that's a big deal.
Hidden Depths:
Is steadily revealed to genuinely love Josh, and, despite appearing to be the domineering one in their relationship, has actually been patiently allowing him to string her along for years out of a hidden desire to get married to him.
After breaking up with Josh she becomes lonely, depressed and binges (in a small way) on comfort food, and then is persuaded by Rebecca that they are both the victims of Josh's exploitation, whereupon she becomes friends with Rebecca.
The extent to which she put up with Josh's basic lack of care for her comes out in a throwaway remark in season 2, when she is disgusted to see that Josh has bought his new girlfriend flowers. She might have been rather pushy and controlling in season 1, but Josh was hardly a model romantic partner either.
Valencia: The only time he got me flowers was prom night. Blue carnations from a gas station. From a bucket. In return, I gave him my virginity.
In the aftermath of Rebecca's suicide attempt in 3x05, it seems as though she's using her friend's misfortunes for her own attention-seeking agenda. However, as it turns out, it was her outlandish way of coping. At the end of the episode, after she, Paula, and Heather, all believed Rebecca had attempted suicide again when she wouldn't respond to them from behind a locked door (she had earphones on), Valencia had a full breakdown. She stated that she'd never had a real friend before and wanted Rebecca to promise she'd never do that again because she was so terrified of losing her first genuine friend.
In Season 4's "I'm Not The Person I Used To Be", Heather is delighted to learn that when Valencia was dating Josh in high school, she was secretly deeply in love with someone else the entire time, but nothing came of it. It turns out to have been the pre-priesthood Father Brah, who never got Valencia's love note because it was in his varsity jacket in the trunk of Hector's car. Father Brah and Valencia have a fond moment of closure, recognizing that they're both happy in their existing relationships: she with Beth, he with God.
Hypocrite: In Season 1, she considered Rebecca pathetic because she had no friends, even though she herself suffered from Friendless Background and Josh's friends only tolerated her because she was Josh's girlfriend.
I Am Not Pretty: After she's turned to baked goods in the aftermath of her breakup with Josh, she believes herself to have become grossly overweight. Immediately Lampshaded:
Valencia: Okay, can you stop talking about my weight? I get it, I'm a ginormous 6, junior 5/7, so just shut up about it.
Rebecca: Okay, fine. Just a fun fact, the national average size is actually a 12, so, you know, you're — you're very petite.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: It's clear that she's a lot more insecure than her haughty demeanor would indicate.
It's All About Me: Horrendously self-centered. She tried to get Josh to propose at his sister's wedding specifically to steal some of their thunder. Josh actually realizing how she never listens or cares about anyone else makes him break up with her.
Horror Hunger: In an early episode she reveals she has some kind of eating disorder as has felt like she's starving since it started in 1998. After breaking up with Josh she starts eating more and (probably not coincidentally) becomes much nicer as well.
Jerkass: Generally a mean-spirited and self-centered person who looks down on everyone, her boyfriend included. Her more humanizing moments make her actions more relatable, but no more sympathetic. Season Two is slowly phasing this out, making her pitiable and more three-dimensional.
Jerkass Has a Point:
For all of her horrible qualities, she's completely right to suspect Rebecca of wanting to steal Josh for herself.
She's also right that Josh's refusal to choose a direction for their relationship is pretty ridiculous considering how long they've been together. By the end of the first season, you sort of want to shake him and say, "Propose to her or break up with her, already!"
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She becomes this from season 2 onward, as her more positive aspects are more focused on.
Lean and Mean: She's model thin in contrast to the noticeably curvy Rebecca. The show repeatedly emphasizes her smug sense of superiority about being thinner than other women as one of her many negative traits. She seems to have been taking Josh's breakup badly, given her return in Season 2's "When Will Josh and His Friend Leave Me Alone?": Rebecca is stunned to see Valencia buying a donut in public and stuffing it into her mouth. In mid-munch, she catches Rebecca's eye, and her "Oh, FFS" look is priceless.
Ms. Fanservice: Her gorgeous looks and fantastic body are constantly the center of attention, both due to her love of showing off and Rebecca's jealousy. She also propositions Josh by offering to keep him company in the shower in "Why Is Josh in A Bad Mood?" and shows off a red bikini to him in "I'm Going to the Beach with Josh and His Friends!".
No Sense of Humor: When Rebecca makes a joke in an attempt to endear Valencia to her, Valencia is at first confused, then says "Oh, you were making a joke... Yeah, I think you did that once before. Sorry, I don't like humor." Ultimately subverted, see Characterization Marches On.
No Social Skills: She has this with respect to friendships with women, because until Rebecca befriends her, she's never been friends with women before. In the Season 2 episode where Paula gets stuck in the bathroom, Valencia continually tries out various more or less inappropriate responses to whatever's going on, with Heather quietly correcting her. Later, in Season 4, when she wants Beth to propose to her, she's dumbfounded but overjoyed when Beth tells her that Valencia could be the one who makes the proposal.
Politically Incorrect Villain: Not a villain, mostly an antagonist/The Rival to Rebecca for Josh's heart, but she frequently made fatphobic comments against Rebecca and she proved to be a Female Misogynist in her "Women Gotta Stick Together" number.
Put on a Bus: Subverted. Although she moves to New York partway through Season 4, she only spends two episodes there before returning to West Covina for the rest of the series... of holidays. Despite the move, she still manages to appear in both of these episodes anyways; in the first, she video-chats with Rebecca and Heather, while in the second, Rebecca comes up to the Big Apple for Naomi's charity event and stays at Valencia's place.
Queer Establishing Moment: After a time skip in season three, it's revealed she's got a girlfriend over the 8 month skip.
The Rival: Passive aggressive competition becomes a common occurrence between her and Rebecca over time. Later subverted, as Rebecca realizes Valencia isn't the enemy, and the two bury the hatchet.
Secret Chaser: Gradually becomes more intent on exposing Rebecca's desire to have Josh for herself over the course of the first season.
Shameless Fanservice Girl: Provocatively struts around in a skimpy bikini for no reason beyond making Rebecca self-conscious.
Shipper on Deck: By the finale, she's a Greg/Rebecca shipper.
Sir Not-Appearing-in-This-Trailer: She's notably absent from the opening sequence of season one despite being one of the most important characters in the series, to the point of having two solo musical numbers all to herself. Justified in that she's the closest thing the show has to a consistent antagonist in season 1, and would thus be out of place as one of Rebecca's cartoon "new friends".
So Beautiful, It's a Curse: Valencia gets really sick of people making passes at her and actually feels hurt when Rebecca does it.
Social Media Before Reason: She obsesses with recording and streaming everything in season 3, which she later admits is out of insecurity.
Strawman Has a Point: She compares giving kids sugar to giving them drugs. This is meant to make her look like a health freak, but anyone who’s struggled with sugar addiction would probably agree with her.
Teacher/Student Romance: She did "hand stuff" with her English teacher when she was in high school. She claims it was no big deal and it was apparently consensual, but Rebecca is understandably freaked out by this, and points out that this was not only not okay for her teacher to do, but also may have been statutory rape, depending on how old Valencia was at the time. She then asks if he was ever fired or if Valencia knows if he had relations with any other students. Valencia, for her part, honestly doesn't seem to get why Rebecca's making a fuss.
Took a Level in Kindness: Did she ever! She goes from being a rather bitchy and controlling girlfriend to Josh, and The Rival to Rebecca, to being a genuinely kind, thoughtful, and loving friend.
Villainy-Free Villain: From Rebecca and Paula's initial POV, she's presented as the Alpha Bitch, Romantic False Lead, and they feel justified trying undermine her and steal Josh away. The reality is that Rebecca hates her because she's good-looking and dating Josh, and that's pretty much it. While she is arrogant and frequently condescending, her actions toward Rebecca are 100% justified. Rebecca eventually realizes this, and they end up becoming friends. Ironically, her most questionable actions all come as a direct result of hanging out with Rebecca.
Visual Development: In season two she dials back on the bold makeup and skimpy clothes she was frequently seen wearing in season one, to reflect her being a friendlier and less intimidating character.