Aborted Arc: Ben's fixation on Juliet is never brought up again after "The Other Woman"; they never interact again beyond the flashbacks in that episode, and Ben never so much as mentions Juliet for the rest of the series.
Abusive Father: Had one in Roger Linus, a self-loathing drunk who blamed Ben for the death of his mother.
Affably Evil: He's very charming, polite and softspoken even when manipulating you and planning your demise.
Ambiguous Situation: After he's exposed as an imposter, Ben initially claims that the real Henry Gale died when his balloon crashed; when that is revealed to be a lie as well, Ben then claims that he didn't personally kill Henry. Ben's word is all but worthless at that point (indeed, he keeps lying by referring to the leader of the Others as a separate person), so it's not clear if he honestly didn't kill Henry (in which case, he probably ordered one of his people to do it) or if he's still lying and did the deed himself (his exact knowledge of where Henry's balloon crashed suggests that, if nothing else, Ben had been there before).
Anti-Villain: For all his awful deeds and less than admirable qualities, Ben has genuinely suffered in his life, his goals are often for the betterment of his people, and, in later seasons, he pits himself against greater evils like Widmore and the Man in Black.
Arch-Enemy:
For the survivors as a whole, particularly Jack, for much of the series. It's to the point that Jack declines to help save a twelve-year-old boy's life in season 5 because he knows that boy will grow up to be Ben.
Ben and Charlies Widmore have been at odds ever since Ben ousted him as leader of the Others, and it's Widmore's desire to kill Ben that brings Martin Keamy to the Island in season 4. Keamy's murder of Alex redoubles Ben's hatred for Widmore, and Ben very nearly murders Penny for revenge. Even after they end up on more or less the same side, Ben and Widmore's hatred remains, and after Widmore is forced to cooperate with the Man in Black to save Penny, Ben shoots him dead, bitterly remarking "he doesn't get to save his daughter".
The Atoner: Eventually moves into this, particularly after the death of his daughter.
Badass Bookworm: Ben might be slight of build, but he's fast and highly skilled. Plays up the bookworm part of it so much that it's still jarring whenever he decides to remind you that he's a merciless and capable killer. Put a baton in his hand and watch him wreck everybody.
Badass in Distress: Even if beaten and bound, he rarely loses his composure and snark factor.
Being Evil Sucks: Ben is slow on the draw, but he realizes this as the guilt over allowing his daughter to die begins to eat away at him and he realizes, as he put it to Ilana, the one thing that really mattered was already gone rather than the power that he so craved.
Big Bad: Ben was a Hidden Villain during the first two seasons for the most part; the Others were shrouded in mystery, and nobody even knew about Ben's existence, although he was the one who sent Ethan and Goodwin to infiltrate the survivors. When he finally appears in Season 2, he masquerades for most of it as 'Henry Gale' and claims that he crashed on the island just like the survivors. When he's revealed to be one of the Others, he pretends to be a regular mook until the Season Finale. In the third season he's the Big Bad in earnest but becomes an Enemy Mine for the fourth and fifth seasons before finally graduating to Token Evil Teammate in Season 6.
Blatant Lies: He's so good at it, he convinces people he's regularly betrayed to eat from his hand. It occurs so much that Sun even lampshades it by asking him why she should trust him (in one of the few occasions that he’s actually telling the truth) and he straight up says she shouldn’t.
Bond Villain Stupidity: Ben's attempts to kill Locke in Season 3 and Desmond in Season 5 amount to him shooting them once in the stomach without taking the time or effort to make sure they're dead; Locke survives due to his missing kidney and recovers, while Desmond manages to power through the injury when he sees Ben threatening his family.
Breakout Character: Michael Emerson's debut performance was so good, the writers changed the script because they wanted so badly for him to continue on. Emerson also ended up getting more Emmy recognition for his performance than any other cast member, earning nominations for each of the show's last 4 seasons (and one win for Season 5).
Breakout Villain: Originally scheduled for a three-episode run, the writers evolved him into the main antagonist for most of the series.
…But He Sounds Handsome: After the jig is up and he's exposed as an imposter, Ben insists that the Others' actual leader is "a brilliant man". Said leader is, of course, Ben himself.
Cassandra Truth: He spends most of "Through the Looking Glass" telling Jack that the Freighter crew aren't who they say they are and that the Survivors shouldn't trust them. Jack, naturally, refuses to listen because he assumes Ben's lying again. Except, as Charlie discovers, Ben was actually telling the truth for once.
The Chessmaster: He's well-known for his skills in manipulation. Even people who know not to trust him end up doing his bidding. Even when trapped in the Hatch, he plays Jack and Locke against each other with minimal effort.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: Ben has a tendency to change his loyalties. He betrayed the Dharma Initiative to join the Others under Widmore's leadership, then betrayed Widmore and took his place. He later betrayed Locke, Jacob and the Man in Black (although he wasn't really on the Man in Black's side to begin with).
Consummate Liar: "I Lied." is his Catchphrase, if that means anything. Even in the final season, his first instinct when confronted with a problem is to lie his way out of it, and he's vaguely annoyed whenever people who've dealt with him for any length of time are surprised to find that he lied to them. This creates a bit of an issue in a Played for Laughs way after his reformation, as Ilana found it hard to believe he wasn't the one who knocked out Sun even though he is now telling the truth.
Cool Teacher: In the flash-sideways, he's this to Alex, tutoring her for her upcoming test in the library before school.
Crazy-Prepared: To the point of keeping a shotgun in his piano bench, just in case.
Creepy Blue Eyes: Ben's eyes are a light shade of blue that goes well with his manipulative nature. It's even brought to attention a few times when other characters such as Sawyer refer to Ben as a "bug-eyed bastard".
Creepy Good: He's still shown to be a bit creepy in "The New Man in Charge" but is definitely a changed man.
Creepy Monotone: He has a calm, long drawl that can be very creepy.
Cultured Badass: He speaks a few languages, is an excellent cook, plays the piano and is very well-read.
Deadpan Snarker: Ben is a major provider of snark, rivaling even Sawyer.
"We have two giant hamsters running in a massive wheel in our secret underground lair."

"No, John, unfortunately we don't have a code for "There is a man in my closet with a gun to my daughter's head" although we obviously should."

"I'm a Pisces, John."

"It's C4, Richard. I put some thought into hiding it."
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: In the Season 5 finale, he kills Jacob. Yes, that Jacob; the guy who's pretty much been played as God since his offscreen introduction to the series.
Didn't Think This Through:
Ben's plan for Ethan and Goodwin to infiltrate the survivor's camps ultimately fails in part because he didn't account for the possibility that the flight's manifest might have survived the crash, which gets Ethan exposed and ultimately killed. Furthermore, while Ben wasn't invested in whether or not Goodwin survived the mission (and in fact, hoped he wouldn't), sending Ethan, the Others' chief and "brilliant" surgeon on a dangerous mission was a serious misstep, especially given that Ben discovered that he had cancer mere days prior.
The map to Henry Gale's hot air balloon was meant to give credibility to Ben's claims of being Henry Gale; he didn't bet on Sayid being thorough enough to dig up the grave supposedly belonging to Henry's wife and finding the real Henry Gale's body there.
Ben's constant lying means that when he's actually telling the truth, nobody believes him, even when it's absolutely in their best interests to heed Ben's word. This bites Ben frequently, especially when he has to work with the survivors, to whom he's been lying from literally the moment they met.
Ben badly overplays his hand by pulling the Reverse Psychology card on Martin Keamy, gambling that claiming to have no attachment to Alex will convince Keamy that killing her would be pointless. Ben failed to account for the fact that pointless killing is basically all Keamy had done since he set foot on the Island (even discounting his murders of Karl and Danielle, Keamy attacked the Barracks unprovoked and gunned down several unarmed and innocent people), so by refusing to play along, he's just giving Keamy a reason to follow through on his threat to Alex's life.
Disc-One Final Boss: In the early seasons he was portrayed as the Big Bad, but it became much more questionable with his enemy, Charles Widmore, entering the picture. Finally, Ben was revealed to be a pawn of the real Big Bad, Man in Black/Smoke Monster the whole time. It's played pretty straight too, since Ben was defeated and captured in the season 3 finale, the halfway point of the series, in which it seemed everything was finally going to be okay for the Oceanic survivors, until the Your Princess Is in Another Castle! twist ending. This leads to the second half of the series, which depicts Ben as slowly gearing toward a Heel–Face Turn, which he finally does in the final season.
The Dog Bites Back: While he's pretending to be The Dragon to the Man in Black (who had manipulated Ben for most of his life), he learns of the location of the boat Smokey intends on using to escape the Island. After rejoining the survivors and getting stuck under a tree saving Hurley, he tells Kate where MiB's boat is. This not only helps some of the main characters get off the Island, but results in Kate arriving in the nick of time to stop Man in Black from killing Jack, and finally Man in Black's Disney Villain Death.
The Dragon: Ben inadvertently became The Dragon to the Man in Black, who was pretending to be John Locke at the time. When the Man in Black revealed who he really was, he offered Ben the role of The Dragon again, but Ben refused. He then pretended to be The Dragon for a final time, when actually he was just trying to survive while also covertly helping the survivors.
Driven by Envy: He attempts to kill John when it seems that he is The Chosen One by Jacob and later succeeds in Season 5. In the finale, after reuniting in the afterlife, Ben apologizes to Locke and tells him that he killed him "because [Locke] was special. And [Ben] wasn't."
Enemy Mine: Pretty much this to the rest of the cast.
Establishing Character Moment: A retroactive case; some of the very first words out of Ben's mouth are a lie. That he's introduced in an unenviable position also foreshadows his Butt-Monkey qualities.
Ben: My name is Henry Gale! I'm from Minnesota!
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: His adopted daughter, Alex. When she is killed, Ben is crushed and spends the next seasons trying to atone for it.
Even Evil Has Standards: He has a thing about not hurting children, and he couldn't bring himself to murder Penny in cold blood in front of her son.
Fatal Flaw: He has three core flaws.
Pride and a need for control: Ben has a constant need to feel like he is in control, which causes him to cajole and manipulate the people around him. Unfortunately for Ben, this is not a good way to earn trust, and he is disliked and distrusted by everyone who comes near him.
His desire to feel accepted, and his feeling that he is meant for more, which causes him to overcompensate for his insecurity by becoming a ruthless, controlling leader.
Insecurity: deep down, Ben Linus is a scared, confused little man who desperately wants agency in his life, and he will do anything in order to keep power for himself because of his feelings of inadequacy.
First-Name Basis: Calls everyone he works against by their first name, showing his affable side.
Foil: To John Locke. The two of them come from rough backgrounds, with fathers who abused and exploited them and having a strong constant desire to belong somewhere and have agency in their lives. The difference is that John, while being opaque and more than a little eccentric, is generally a decent man who wants to help others, while Ben is a smarmy, amoral Manipulative Bastard who uses people at will, though he does come to be a better man as the series moves along.
Forgot to Gag Him: The number of times the other characters don't do this is amazing. They may as well have not even tied him up if they're going to let him talk. A truly shining example from Season 4: Sawyer finally wises up and tries to just shoot Ben on the spot while he is beaten, bloodied and with his hands bound. Linus talks himself out of it on the spot but is still locked in a solitary room in a basement. Then he talks himself out of it too and is allowed to eat with everybody in the kitchen while still being closely watched. Skip one episode and he is left totally by himself, playing a piano with a shotgun hidden inside it, just in case. And by this point he has already lied to, manipulated and even ordered to kill main characters multiple times, so they REALLY should have known what to expect.
Freudian Excuse: His father was horribly abusive to him, blaming him for the death of his mother. He was also corrupted by the Others and Jacob from a young age, which is largely Sayid's fault since he shot an innocent, abused child who had risked a great deal to help him because of things he hadn't done to him yet, so the other survivors were forced to turn to the Others to save his life (which involved an almost literal Deal with the Devil which basically life-bonded Ben to the Others, which set him up to be their main antagonist later on in the future.)
From Nobody to Nightmare: From a quiet young boy to a ruthless mass murderer pulling all the strings.
Genius Bruiser: He's a small, scholarly-looking man capable of beating the hell out of big tough guys like Sawyer and Keamy.
Genocide from the Inside: He helped the Hostiles exterminate all his fellow Dharma Initiative members. Although it wasn't his decision but a order given by the Leader at the time (implicitly Charles Widmore).
Go-Karting with Bowser: In one of the "missing pieces" mobisodes, Jack plays chess with Ben, with the latter noting he's the first person in a long time to be giving him a challenge at the game.
Going Down with the Ship: When the Island is sinking in "The End", he decides that he will stay behind and comes as close as it is to namedrop this trope while still referring to the Island.
"If this Island's going down then I'm going down with it."
Greater-Scope Villain: In Season 1; Ben neither appears nor is named, and the Others as a group are little more than a vague presence until the season finale, but Ethan's infiltration of the survivors' camp, Tom's attack on the raft, and the accompanying abductions of Claire and Walt were carried out on his orders, and a flashback in Season 5 shows that when Rousseau described "the Others" taking her child, she was referring to Ben specifically. It isn't until Season 2 that Ben is introduced and assumes the role of Big Bad.
The Heavy: He's the main antagonist for the majority of the series. Even when he was the Token Evil Teammate, it seemed that he was ultimately going to wind up as the show's Big Bad until towards the end of Season 6, when the true Big Bad is revealed to be the Man in Black, aka the Smoke Monster, who manipulated even Ben's actions the entire time, and finally plays the role directly in the final season, while Ben winds up pulling a Heel–Face Turn.
Ben: When I'm at war, I'll do what I need to do to win, but I will not kill innocent people.
Heel–Face Turn: Done beautifully in a gradual build-up before finally being solidified in "Dr. Linus".
Heroic Sacrifice: A non-fatal one. He pushes Hurley out of the way of a fallen tree and ends up stuck under it as a result. Thankfully, the survivors recognize him as on their side now and manage to get him free.
He Who Fights Monsters: The majority of his kill count are people who have tried to either hurt/destroy the Island or his people (and those that REALLY deserved it *cough*Keamy*cough*). He dedicated his entire life to keeping the Others and The Island safe from harm.
I Choose to Stay: In the series finale, Ben is one of the only characters to remain in the Flash-Sideways reality after regaining their memories. When Locke asks about it, Ben says he "still has things [he] needs to work out," which, based on the season's previous episodes, implies he wants to look after Alex for the time being.
I Just Want to Be Special: The Season 5 finale reveals that Benjamin Linus deeply wants to be as special as Locke seems to be. When he gives Jacob a speech about this, Jacob basically tells him that he was never special. Ben, not taking this very well, stabs and kills Jacob.
Iconic Sequel Character: Big time. He's easily one of the most important characters in later seasons and yet he wasn't introduced until halfway through the second season.
Idiot Ball: Sending Ethan, the Others' "brilliant" (and apparently only) surgeon on a dangerous infiltration mission was not one of Ben's smarter ideas, especially since Ben had discovered a fatal tumor on his spine two days prior.
Iron Butt-Monkey: Despite the many brutal beatings Ben takes over the course of his appearances, he never suffers long-term consequences from his injuries and survives to the end of the series.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Zig-Zagged, Ben Linus is a smarmy bastard who often and shamelessly manipulates other people for his own ends. He does show the human side of himself to people, but just as often reveals to be lying or using people. Ultimately he does see the error of his ways, and becomes a better person in the process.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: While Ben Linus spends most of the series rotating through the Heel–Face Revolving Door, his most heinous act is his callous murder of John Locke, strangling and hanging him just minutes after talking him out of suicide for no other reason than petty jealousy. It's treated as an In-Universe Moral Event Horizon and is one of the few things he ever shows genuine guilt for. Locke forgiving him in the afterlife makes him almost break down in gratitude, and it is this moment in which his redemption is solidified.
Karma Houdini: Some may see him as one of these. He survives the series and is forgiven by the characters despite the fact he committed several murders and put the survivors through hell. However, he isn't a true example, as he constantly gets his ass kicked, loses everything he cared about, and he finally realizes what a monster he has been in his quest for power and decides to redeem himself of his actions. In the afterlife, he is shown to be a much better person, and despite all of the forgiveness and redemption, he still decides not to move on since he feels he hasn't earned it yet. Lampshaded musically by the track "Karma Has No Price" that plays during his redemption scene.
Karmic Butt-Monkey: Ben is the series' main Manipulative Bastard, an unrepentant murderer and makes the survivors' time on the Island a living hell for no good reason. He's also on the receiving end of a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown so many times it comes across as a Running Gag.
Kick the Dog:
Subjecting Karl to Room 23 so that he wouldn't impregnate Alex.
Showing Goodwin's dead body to Juliet to drive home that Juliet belongs to him.
Shooting Locke and leaving him to a slow and torturous death out of raw jealousy.
Knight Templar Parent: And mixed with Papa Wolf toward his adopted daughter, Alex, to the point of attempting to brainwash her boyfriend to prevent Alex from getting pregnant. His direct responsibility for her death is a major driver of his Atoner status in Season 4 and beyond.
The Lancer:
Post Heel–Face Turn in Season 6, Ben serves this role to Ilana for a short period before she blows herself up with dynamite. Where Ilana's primary goal is serving Jacob's last will by helping the candidates achieve their destiny, Ben has no love lost for Jacob and is more concerned with the immediate problems of survival and defeating the Man in Black. Ilana also prefers to solve her problems by pointing guns at them, while Ben resorts more to tricks and duplicity.
Becomes Hurley's lieutenant on the Island at the end of the series.
Laser-Guided Karma: When he was the manipulative leader of the Others who killed and tormented people, he lost everything (his adopted daughter, his leadership, etc.). It worked both ways as well, since when Ben redeemed himself, things went a lot better for him and even saved his life.
Manipulative Bastard: He plays damn near everyone like a fiddle through lies, nuggets of truth and emotional exploitation. He's manipulated almost the entire cast at some point or another, and they only continue to even pay attention to him because he convinces them to.
Alex: "That's what my father does - he manipulates people. He makes you think it's your idea but it's his."
Meaningful Name:
In The Bible, Benjamin was Jacob's twelfth and youngest son, whose mother Rachel also died in childbirth. Though in Genesis, Benjamin was not the name given by his dying mother.
Linus was the name of the second pope in the pope line, succeeding Saint Peter, and is thus mostly remembered as "the second pope." Ben Linus is Jacob's second, and later Hurley's second.
And of course, on a much more mundane and possibly unintended note, a surname pronounced as "Lie-nus" is rather fitting for a Consummate Liar.
Minored in Ass-Kicking: Ben's The Chessmaster, through and through. That being said, if push comes to shove he will wreck your shit in the blink of an eye, though he's still not quite as much of a fighter as Sayid, Keamy or Desmond.
Missing Mom: His mother died in childbirth. (Interestingly, she was played by Michael Emerson's wife.)
Moral Myopia:
When he attacks Ana Lucia in season 2, Ben describes the two Others she killed as "good people who were leaving you alone"; the only way this statement works is if Ben means Ana Lucia specifically, and even then, he's disregarding the fact that said Others (and the group as a whole) were kidnapping members of her group.
While fatally stabbing Keamy, Ben is furiously reminding the mercenary that he murdered Ben's daughter. When Locke points out that Keamy's death will doom everyone on the freighter due to his Dead Man's Switch, Ben coldly replies "so?".
Morality Pet: He sucks as a father and isn't exactly a saint in other aspects of his life, but his love for his adopted daughter is genuine. When she is killed, Ben blames himself, and her memory drives his redemption arc forward.
More than Mind Control: He's able to convince people who want him dead to do his bidding.
My God, What Have I Done?:
Has this expression after he tries to save Alex's life by telling Keamy he doesn't care about her. When Keamy kills her as a result, Ben has a look of horror as he realizes the last thing Alex heard was that he didn't love her and only used her as a pawn. He spends the rest of the next few episodes in genuine shock and guilt.
After realizing who and what the Man in Black truly is and how much he'd been played for a fool, Ben comes to deeply regret having killed both Locke and Jacob, explicitly apologizing for the former while giving Locke's eulogy (doing so again when he and Locke meet again in the afterlife) and being visibly stricken when Miles tells him that Jacob died sincerely hoping for Ben to be better than Jacob thought he was.
The Napoleon: Even compared to Napoleon in the show on one occasion.
Non-Action Guy: He almost never uses a gun or engages in a fight. which made his No-Holds-Barred Beatdown of Keamy all the more terrifying.
Number Two: To Hurley, post-finale.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Not so much stupidity as weakness. His bookish appearance makes it easy for him to appear harmless and vulnerable — right up until he stabs you in the neck or takes your gun and shoots you with it.
Odd Friendship:
Ben and Hurley form a strange friendship over the course of the last few seasons, starting from when Hurley shared his candy bar with him. At the end of the series, they work together to protect the Island, and in the afterlife are clearly happy to see each other.
Also with Sun, who after finding out he didn't kill her husband, the two can be found talking to the point that Ben of all people is actually "honest" with her and tries to protect her from Flocke even before his Heel-Face Turn is completed. She also shows small signs of concern for him and was happy he was back in "Dr. Linus".
Pet the Dog: The first instance is in "The Man Behind the Curtain". Despite being responsible for The Purge, the only member of the Dharma Initiative Ben shows actual remorse for killing is Horace and respectfully closes his eyes. In the flashsideways, he's a gentle and good-natured teacher.
Redemption Equals Life: Ben's newfound selflessness results in him surviving the series.
Reverse Psychology: Attempts to invoke this with Martin Keamy when Martin has Alex captured and threatening to kill her so he can draw Ben out. Ben, in an attempt to save Alex's life, says that he doesn't love Alex and that he stole her as a baby to be used as nothing more than a pawn for him, and for Keamy to just shoot her since she's not leverage...but Keamy shoots her anyways, resulting in Ben realizing he screwed up seeing Alex's corpse fall to the ground.
Reverse Psychology Backfire: Part of the above trope. When Keamy actually kills Alex after Ben insisted that he doesn't love her in an attempt to save her life, Ben stares uncomprehendingly at her corpse.
Self-Made Orphan: His mother died shortly after he was born, and he eventually killed his father with toxic gas during The Purge of the Dharma Initiative.
The Sociopath: Ultimately subverted. Ben displays almost every sign of being a sociopath, but his love for Alex and regret for his actions prove that he isn't one.
The Starscream: His goal was to become ruler of the Island, so he played this role quite frequently. His actions came back to haunt him big time, leading him to not only pull a Heel–Face Turn, but even willingly accept the role of Number Two to Hurley, who had become the new Big Good, and remained loyal to him for the many years the protected the Island. Several years before the series, he was this to Widmore, exiling him for being involved with a woman in the outside world (a relationship that produced Penny), and usurping his position.
Summon Bigger Fish: After being Forced to Watch Keamy murder his daughter Alex, Ben calmly summons the Monster to the Barracks to attack the mercenaries. It takes several hours, but once the Monster does arrive, he effortlessly takes the mercs down and gives Ben's group the opportunity to escape.
Suspiciously Specific Denial: When Locke mentions the possibility of Richard taking him to see Jacob, Ben very quickly says that Richard "doesn't know where Jacob is, he doesn't talk to Jacob". Locke doesn't pick up on it, but Ben's slightly panicked response basically confirms what the show will later explicitly state, that Richard is the only one of the Others who actually talks to Jacob.
Take Over the City: His primary goal throughout the series is this, albeit it's an island, not a city. He succeeds in becoming leader of the Others, though he eventually loses his leadership role and tries to reclaim it frequently. However at the end of the series he gives up on this goal as a result of him losing his adopted daughter Alex as well as guilt and remorse towards his past actions in trying to achieve this goal, leading to him pulling a Heel–Face Turn and even rejecting promises by the Man in Black that he would be ruler of the Island if he helped him escape. He later seems to accept this offer, but is shown to actually be plotting against the Monster and immediately rejoins the survivors once Man in Black goes with Jack and Desmond to the Heart of the Island. In the end, he even willingly accepts being the loyal Number Two to Hurley.
Token Evil Teammate: For the survivors, after he falls from leadership.
Tranquil Fury: "Ah... well."
Troll: For all his sophistication and intelligence, Ben is prone to simply screwing with people for the fun of it:
After drawing a map to his hot air balloon and sending Sayid, Charlie, and Ana Lucia to confirm his story, "Henry Gale" posits a hypothetical that if he really were an Other, he'd have just drawn a map to some secluded area where his people could ambush the survivors and trade them for him, following up this monologue by casually asking Jack and Locke for some milk. He really did draw a map to the balloon, there's no ambush awaiting the search party, and there was nothing to gain from pretending otherwise, so Ben clearly made the entire speech to enjoy making Jack and Locke paranoid over nothing.
While captive at the start of Season 4, Ben takes a couple of opportunities to mess with Jack by "accidentally" keeping it to himself when he sees a wounded Naomi slip away and also sees Kate run off to find her. When Jack demands to know where Naomi went, Ben replies with a faux-innocent "I dunno".
Ben is so prone to deception that he lies a couple of times in jokes where the other person has no way to know that he's lying, nor does he really have any reason to, telling Jack that his mother taught him to read (Ben's mother died giving birth to him) and claiming to "Locke" that he's a Pisces (he's actually a Sagittarius).
Unwitting Pawn: While Ben loves to use this against literally everyone, he ironically turns out to be this to the Man in Black, who begins exploiting him from a very young age taking on his mother's appearance and eventually infecting him with cancer.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: Ben was a shy, quiet, bookish little boy who was twisted by circumstances into a monster.
Villainous Breakdown:
Toward the end of the third season. His slow recovery from surgery, the war with the survivors, Alex's rebellion, Naomi's appearance and the rest of the Others growing dissatisfaction with his leadership result in Ben becoming angry and bloodthirsty.
When faced with the man who killed his daughter (who, it should be pointed out, is a highly trained mercenary), he manages to take him down in a straight fight and stab him to death with his own knife. Honestly not too horrible on its own, but both he and Locke are aware that Keamy’s heart monitor would cause the freighter to explode with dozens of people on it when Keamy died. His only reaction when Locke points that out is a “So?”, delivered with absolutely zero emotion behind it.
Villainous BSoD: After Alex dies, he stares outward in blank incomprehension. For several episodes after that, he shows almost no emotion.
Villain Protagonist: In his centric episodes.
Warrior Therapist: A villainous example; he's not only a master of More than Mind Control and Break Them by Talking, but he has killed a Crazy-Prepared ex-Marine with a telescoping baton and nearly choked a former cop to death in hand-to-hand combat while his hands were tied.
Wouldn't Hurt a Child: One of his earliest redeeming features. Alex became his adoptive daughter because he refused to kill a child. He also decided not to kill Penny because he saw her with little Charlie. He is not above kidnapping them though. This trait is what allows the show to portray Ben as someone capable of redemption by comparing that with the other Big Bad of Season 6, Charles Widmore, the man who ordered him to kill Alex in the first place.
Wicked Cultured: Ben is well-read and cultured; he speaks a few languages, he's in a book club, enjoys literature like Ulysses, Stephen King, and On the Road (if his alias of "Dean Moriarty" is any indication), plays the piano and, unsurprisingly, he's an excellent chess player.
Yandere: For Juliet, in Seasons 3 and 4. He even orchestrates Goodwin's death because he's his romantic rival. Then he shows Juliet the body and tells her "You're mine.".