The Atoner: First for his drug addiction, and then for his unstable behavior in Season 2.
Back for the Finale: Like everyone else.
Beware the Nice Ones: Shooting a disarmed and helpless Ethan six times in the chest definitely counts.
Charlie: I wasn't gonna let that animal near her again.
British Rock Star: Charlie considers himself a 'bloody rock God' but he's more of a one-hit wonder than he perhaps realizes.
Celebrity Survivor: A very loose definition of 'celebrity', but he was the bass player for a semi-successful band.
Deadpan Snarker: Along with Sawyer, he was the primary source of snark in the first two seasons.
Eko: Charlie! Do you know how they got the hatch door open?
Charlie: [strumming on his guitar] No, but if you hum a few bars, I could probably play it.
Dead Artists Are Better: According to Naomi in season 3, after Charlie was reported dead from the crash of Flight 815, Drive Shaft experienced a resurgence in popularity, with a greatest hits album selling extremely well. Charlie is pleasantly surprised by the news that his "death" has been good for the band's image.
Dead Person Conversation: With Hurley.
Disney Death: In Season one. Jack and Kate found Charlie hanging lifeless on bamboo. But Jack, despite Kate stating that he's not coming back to life (even briefly stopping him from trying to save his life), miraculously resuscitates him.
Dogged Nice Guy: To Claire.
Establishing Character Moment: Charlie is introduced wandering around the crash site high off his ass with no clue what's going on - but after things have calmed down, he happily helps Sayid build his signal fire.
Everything Trying to Kill You: For a while Desmond couldn't take his eyes off of Charlie for a second or something might kill him.
Expy: Drive Shaft, being a Manchester alt rock band founded by two brothers who struggled with drug problems, is a pretty obvious expy of Oasis. This is even lampshaded by a flashback where Charlie is busking by performing "Wonderwall".
Face Death with Dignity: He locks the Looking Glass door to save Desmond, gives him a final message and does the sign of the cross before drowning.
Going Cold Turkey: Is forced to do this during the first season after throwing the last of his heroin stash in the fire. He handles the process pretty well possibly due to the island's healing properties. At the end of the first season, he learns about the smugglers' plane full of heroin and while he's tempted, he doesn't use again.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: Whatever flaws he may have, Charlie is, at heart, a good person.
Heroic Sacrifice: To stop the Looking Glass blocking the satellite phone signal, he swims down despite knowing he wouldn't make it back up.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Hurley.
Hidden Depths: Despite his rock 'n' roll lifestyle and drug habit, Charlie is a fairly devout Catholic. In "The Moth", Jack even remarks that he wouldn't have taken Charlie for a religious man.
Nice Guy: Before Season 2, he was possibly the most likeable character on the show, and, after managing to overcome the issues that bubbled up during Season 2, he finds his way back to likability.
Odd Friendship: With Mr. Eko in season 2
Oop North: Hails from Manchester.
Plucky Comic Relief: In particular for the early seasons, when he's paired with Hurley often and has some of the snarkiest lines.
Sanity Slippage: Heroin withdrawal and jealousy over Locke's close relationship with Claire does a number on Charlie's mental state in Season 2, but after a while, he pulls himself together.
Sex, Drugs, and Rock & Roll: Before he came to the island.
Shoot the Dog: Depending on whether or not you believe that sparing a defeated but highly dangerous person is worth it, Charlie shooting Ethan may fall into either.
Took a Level in Badass: See also Shoot the Dog.
Wham Line: Charlie has several:
From Pilot Pt. 1, after finding the pilot’s body: “Guys, what could do something like that?”
From Pilot Pt. 2: “Guys, where are we?”
From Through the Looking Glass: (written on his hand in marker) “Not Penny’s Boat”.
What the Hell, Hero?: When Claire returns from her captivity with Ethan and appears to have amnesia, Jack, Sayid, and Locke start discussing theories about what could have happened. Charlie calls them out for not bothering to check on her once she was awake.
Charlie: You boys talk about Claire all you want, I'm gonna go talk to her. I get the impression that she might still be a tad upset.
You Can't Fight Fate: In Season 3, Desmond reveals that Death not only wants him but is a persistent bastard. Charlie fights it until he’s given the chance to go out like a hero and save the others, wherein he accepts his fate with dignity while warning Desmond of danger.