Ax-Crazy: Quite literally in the final season.
Became Their Own Antithesis: In the first four seasons, Claire is a good-natured, sweet young woman who wouldn't hurt a fly. After three years alone, becoming infected, and befriending the Man in Black, she's become murderous and insane, willing to cut the throat of her former friend Kate because she believed Kate stole her child.
Beware the Nice Ones: In Season 6. She kills two Others without flinching.
Brainwashed and Crazy / Corrupt the Cutie: In-between seasons, she was corrupted by the Man in Black who turned her into a rifle-toting jungle-dwelling loon.
Break the Cutie: She was an outspoken but sweet and good-natured girl. She lost that sweetness sometime before the final season.
But We Used a Condom!: Aaron was conceived even though she was taking the pill.
Character Signature Song: In her first flashback episode she asks a couple planning to adopt her baby to sing "Catch a Falling Star" to him. The song makes several reappearances throughout the series in connection to her and Aaron.
Co-Dragons: With Sayid, to the Man in Black in Season 6.
Dark Action Girl: In Season 6. She becomes unpredictable, ruthless and dangerously handy with a gun.
Everyone Has Standards: Despite her corruption at the Man in Black's hands, Claire refuses to be party to the murder of her friends at his hands, and the Man in Black abandons her for it.
Everyone's Baby Sister: The other survivors are very protective of her. Sawyer was so protective Miles even asked "What are you, her big brother?" Interesting because one of the survivors actually WAS her big brother, although they didn't realize it until Season 4 and 6, respectively.
Face–Heel Turn: Between Seasons 4 and 6, when she's alone on the island with only the Man in Black for company. His suggestions turn her.
Heel–Face Turn: After learning of the Man in Black's intentions of killing her friends and being abandoned by him when she refuses to help him.
Fatal Flaw: Her fear of being abandoned.
Go Mad from the Isolation: Spending three years on the Island with only the Man in Black for consistent company did not do wonders for Claire's sanity.
Good Girl Gone Bad: Claire was easily the sweetest and kindest survivor, but after the Man in Black gets his hooks into her, she becomes ruthless and insane.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: See The Heart below.
The Heart: Enhanced episodes stated that she was considered the heart and soul of the 815 survivors.
Imperiled in Pregnancy: Claire is not only involved in a plane crash but kidnapped while she's pregnant.
Kubrick Stare: Develops one in Season 6 after going mad, mainly towards Kate.
Long-Lost Relative: Claire and Jack are half-siblings; their father Christian had an affair with Claire's mother, resulting in Claire. Claire herself doesn't learn Christian's name nor her relation to Jack until the final season, where she is informed by the Man in Black.
Mama Bear: To Aaron, especially in season six when she learns that Kate was raising Aaron.
Mirror Character: In Season 6, Claire is noted in-universe to have become exactly like Danielle Rousseau, having been separated from her baby and left alone on the Island for years, resulting in her undergoing a significant Sanity Slippage while also taking a level in badass, living wild and making booby traps for the Others in the jungle.
Never My Fault: In Season 6, Claire blames Kate for "taking" Aaron, disregarding that she wandered off with the Man in Black in the middle of the night and left her son alone. Justified, as Claire is very clearly not in her right mind and has been manipulated by the Man in Black for three years.
Pregnant Hostage: Averted. Ethan nabs her, but she isn't a hostage, she's the goal.
Put on a Bus: After wandering off into the jungle and vanishing near the end of Season 4, she is entirely absent from Season 5.
The Bus Came Back: In Season 6, though much worse for wear.
Sanity Slippage: Three years alone on an island with only an Eldritch Abomination for company did not do wonders for her sanity. Although she seemed to be recovering somewhat by the Grand Finale.
Secret Other Family: She and her mother were this to Christian Shepherd. He mentions that he paid the mortgage on Carole's house and covered her medical bills during her coma.
Suspiciously Similar Substitute: In season 6 she is basically the new Danielle Rousseau.
Took a Level in Badass: After three years alone on the Island, Claire has become a Rousseau clone.
Took a Level in Jerkass: However, she's also become psychotic and abrasive, even around her friends.
Trauma Conga Line: She was left alone and abandoned on an island for three years longing for her son who didn't know she existed and thought Kate was his mother. With several people who wanted to kill her. And is "infected" by the Man in Black.
Trauma-Induced Amnesia: When Ethan kidnaps her and administers her drugs to keep her passive, she blocks out the memory and only later recalls what happened with help from Libby.
Wild Hair: In Season six.