Accidental Murder: While fighting with Kelvin, who was trying to leave the Island and abandon Desmond to push the button alone, Desmond bangs Kelvin's head against a rock, accidentally killing him.
Badass Bookworm: Loves the works of Charles Dickens, and has read every work but "Our Mutual Friend" which he is saving for just before he dies.
Beard of Sorrow: While on his boat after trying to flee the island and discovering that he can't escape the island; it just keeps bringing him back. He's clean-shaven when he's off the island; his facial hair seems directly proportionate to his state of mind.
Breakout Character: Originally intended only to appear in the first three episodes of Season 2, he was brought back and given A Day in the Limelight in the season finale and later promoted to the main cast thanks to his unexpected popularity.
Bunker Woman: He became a Gender Inverted version after crashing on the island. Kelvin dragged him into the Swan hatch and told him it wasn't safe to go back outside. After years of believing this, and dutifully entering the numbers into the computer, he finally learned the truth when he spotted a tear in Kelvin's hazmat suit.
The Bus Came Back: After a large number of absences from the main timeline of Seasons 5 and 6. Well, more like the bus was kidnapped, locked in a submarine, and dragged back against his will.
Butt-Monkey: Desmond has gone through some extremely bad times in his life. He's been emotionally destroyed, lost the love of his life, came close to death several times and was literally told that the island wouldn't let him have a happy ending.
Catchphrase: "I'll see you in another life, brother" is his go-to way of saying goodbye to someone he thinks he won't be seeing again.
The Constant: Desmond and Daniel are the Trope Namers. Daniel notes that Desmond will be his Constant if anything goes wrong.
Cosmic Plaything: He's told multiple times that no matter what he does, fate is against him.
Eloise: You may not like your path, Desmond, but pushing that button is the only truly great thing that you will ever do.
Eloise: I'm sorry to have to tell you this, Desmond, but the Island isn't done with you yet.
Widmore: The Island isn't done with you yet.
Death Seeker: It’s revealed that he almost committed suicide in Season 2, having had enough of the loneliness and the mental stress caused by pushing the button. Fortunately, Locke chose that moment to bang on the Hatch loud enough for Desmond to hear, making him realize that other people were on the Island and restoring his will to live.
Drowning My Sorrows: Whenever he's crushed by the world (which is often), Desmond has himself a drink or four.
Earn Your Happy Ending: Desmond has been through emotional and physical pain that would drive most people to insanity, but he's one of few main characters to survive the series, and with their Love Interest and child intact, no less.
Genius Bruiser: He's very intelligent and crafty when he needs to be and is one of the tougher characters around. Out of the main cast, only he and Sayid have an extensive military background.
Guile Hero: In the flash-sideways timeline.
Happily Married: Once he and Penny reunite, they waste no time in getting married and having a son.
Iconic Sequel Character: He's a major part of the show's over-arching mythology and the focus of several popular episodes but was first introduced in the second season premiere.
Inexplicably Awesome: Exactly how Desmond can survive massive amounts of electromagnetism, why he got flashes of the future related to Charlie's death, and why he's so susceptible to Mental Time Travel, is never explained, though it seems likely that the Swan implosion triggered a lot of it.
Living MacGuffin: Once he’s back on the Island and it becomes clear that the Man in Black wants him for his plan, the entirety of the conflict revolves around everyone trying to either find him or kill him.
Looks Like Jesus: Before he shaved off his beard. Henry Ian Cusick has actually played Jesus before.
Maybe Magic, Maybe Mundane: When Daniel talks to Desmond during the time flashes in Season 5, the buzzing that heralds the time jumps begins. Unlike the other characters who aren’t time traveling, Desmond can clearly hear the buzzing and looks around trying to figure out what it is, and at that exact moment in the present day, Desmond suddenly remembers Daniel telling him to find his mother.
Meaningful Name: He is named after Scottish philosopher David Hume, who is known for his philosophical empiricism and scepticism and is considered one of the most important figures of the Scottish Enlightenment.
Messianic Archetype: He even looked the part while he had a beard.
Mr. Fanservice: He has shower scenes, shows up running naked through the jungle at one point, and spends most of Season 3 and 4 dressed in a blue shirt unbuttoned halfway down.
Nice Guy: He's very pleasant and friendly, considering he was isolated from the woman he loved and almost all human contact for about three years. He is extremely hostile when first introduced, but because he thinks the people who've just broke into the Swan are dangerous. Given the dynamite and sidearms they were packing (dynamite which they had just used to break uninvited into his dwelling), he was entirely reasonable to assume as such. After the Swan implosion, he devotes himself to saving Charlie's life by thwarting scenarios in his prophetic flashes.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: He doesn’t mean to, but following Kelvin away from the Swan causes him to almost not push the button in time. As a result, an electromagnetic incident occurs and causes Oceanic 815 to crash.
Promotion to Parent: When Charles Widmore asks why he didn't graduate from university, Desmond mentions that he had to look after his three brothers. Desmond's tone implies their father either died or left them, and there's no mention of their mother.
Put on a Bus: After escaping from the Island, he mostly disappears from the story except for a brief fight with Ben Linus.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: People (mostly Widmore) throw these at Desmond at any opportunity.
Sanity Slippage: He's more than a little unbalanced when the survivors first find him in the Swan. Mind, at that point, he'd been completely alone for over six weeks, likely unable to get a good night's sleep (having to wake up to push the button every 100 minutes or so), and thinking that he may have caused the world to end. Under those circumstances, anyone would be a little frazzled. By the time he arrives back at the Island after attempting to sail away, however, he's far more stable, if drunk and depressed, and manages to stay a relatively well-balanced individual for the remainder of the series.
Verbal Tic: He has a tendency to call people 'brother' or 'sister'. It's a habit he picked up from his time in a monastery.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: In the flash-sideways, if running over Locke is any indication.