All-Loving Hero: Hurley is a generally friendly person and doesn't find it hard to be friends with people he once considered enemies. In particular, he and Ben became good friends during his time as Protector (to the point that he invited Ben to move on with everyone else in the afterlife), and he's even willing to help Michael move on from the Island after he's stuck as a Whisper even though he killed Libby.
Badass Adorable: Despite his many levels in badass, he's still a good-hearted man who takes care of people and geeks out over Star Wars.
Bad Liar: Hurley is a terrible liar, being a naturally honest man.
Berserk Button: He takes Sawyer's cracks about his weight, but he loses it when Sawyer mocks his fears that he is hallucinating. The result is a vicious beating (for him, anyway) that destroys Sawyer's tent.
Beware the Honest Ones: Hurley is generally the last person you want to entrust with a secret and he's very bad at lying. However, he was able to trick Sawyer into becoming a nicer person and in Season 4, he was able to help Locke get the drop on Sayid's group by pretending to have been abandoned at the Barracks.
Beware the Nice Ones: Hurley is probably the single nicest Survivor in the entire series, but when he's pushed to his limits, he's perfectly willing to harm or kill others to protect his friends. One particularly cruel jibe from Sawyer drives Hurley to beat him senseless (an act that no one was in any particular hurry to stop), and he mows down Pryce with a DHARMA van to save his friends in the Season 3 finale.
Big Damn Heroes: Takes out Pryce with the DHARMA bus in the Season 3 finale, saving Jin, Sayid, and Bernard.
Big Eater: He was one, leading to his weight problems. It was partially an act of punishment for his self-loathing and guilt over feeling he caused an accident that killed others.
Big Fun: He's quite clearly overweight, but he's also one of the funniest characters who's capable of defusing a dramatic scene. He's well aware of this too, and one of his self-appointed roles in the camp is keeping spirits up when things are looking bleak (hence the creation of the golf course and the repair of the DHARMA van).
Big Good: At the end of the series, he is promoted to protector of the Island after the deaths of Jacob and Jack. The finale reveals that he and Ben served the role for presumably centuries.
Book Dumb: Hurley doesn't have the best grammar, but he has surprising emotional intelligence and resourcefulness, which saves the group more than once.
Hurley: What do we do about the... [sees Walt] B-O-D-Y-S?
Michael: What are you spelling, man, "bodies"?
Walt: B-O-D-I-E-S.
Car Fu: In the Season 3 finale, Hurley mows down Pryce with a DHARMA van in order to save Jin, Sayid, and Bernard.
Catchphrase: Hurley calls just about everyone "dude".
Cosmic Plaything: At least, that's what he thinks he is. And he sort of is, the same way all the Losties are.
Deadpan Snarker: Not quite as deadpan as some of the other characters, but he has great lines and certainly has his snarky moments.
Drives Like Crazy: Almost every time Hurley gets behind the wheel, screaming is somehow involved.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: Despite being perhaps the most emotionally intelligent person on the entire island, he's frequently dismissed or ignored. Nearly every time he opens up about his mental health issues, he's dismissed or deemed crazy by fellow survivors.
Establishing Character Moment: After the chaos of the initial crash, Hurley immediately starts trying to make the other survivors comfortable by passing out food (including giving double to Claire since she's eating for two), then proceeds to misspell the word "bodies".
Fatal Flaw: His main flaw is his lack of confidence in himself, which often causes him to underestimate himself. Because he's not as physically or tactically capable as the rest of the group, he tends to assume he's useless, when he proves crucial to the group's success on countless occasions.
Fat and Skinny: No matter who he's teamed with. Charlie, Sawyer, Locke, Miles. Even more so in the episode Everybody Hates Hugo where his fast food coworker buddy is played by D.J. Qualls.
Guile Hero: He manages to get Sawyer to step up as a leader for the survivors by, essentially, conning the con man (he claims that the group is voting to kick Sawyer out of the camp unless he can treat them better). Despite Sawyer calling it "the lamest con in the history of cons", it works.
The Heart: If anyone is going to show concern for the survivors' mental wellbeing it's Hurley. He builds the golf course in the first season to give everyone something fun to do, and later pushes to fix the Dharma van for similar reasons. He always tries to encourage people to be the best versions of themselves and picks them up when they're feeling down. By the end of the series, he's basically the only character that everyone likes and who likes everyone else, even former villains like Ben.
Hurley: What do I do?
Ben: I think you do what you do best. You take care of people.
Heartbreak and Ice Cream: By his own admission, he eats when he's depressed and food became his comfort and a form of punishment for his guilt and self-loathing.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He becomes best friends with Charlie, to the point of taking day trips into the forest together for fun reasons like repairing the van. He's absolutely devastated when Charlie dies and leads the group in not trusting the freighter crew because his trust in Charlie is absolute.
Hidden Depths:
Although he seems like Big Fun and nothing more than comic relief, Hurley has wrestled with survivor's guilt and mental illness.
For all his funny moments and personal issues, deep down, Hurley is leadership material and brings out the best in other people, as he proves by conning Sawyer into becoming a better person, and, after taking Jack's place as the Island's protector, recruiting Ben as his Number Two and forming a strong friendship with the once conniving and ruthless man.
I Let Gwen Stacy Die: Hugo feels this way in regards to Libby. He'd forgotten to bring blankets to a picnic they were having, and she went to the hatch to get some. As a result, she died and Hurley feels responsible.
I See Dead People: Starting once he gets off-island.
The Lancer: In Season 6, Hurley begins to step up to take a leadership role in the group, with Jack taking a backseat to some of Hurley's decisions as he recognises that he can't control every situation anymore. In the series finale, Jack chooses Hurley to succeed him as the protector of the Island when he heads off to make a Heroic Sacrifice to save the Island and his friends.
Living Is More than Surviving: He says as much to Jack shortly after the crash, recognising that focusing only on the nitty-gritty of survival is eventually going to drive everyone mad from stress. This leads him to come up with ways to cheer people up such as building the golf course or using the food from the Hatch for one big meal.
My Beloved Smother: His mother is very controlling and constantly badgers him to get married: ideally to someone who can give her grandchildren.
Nice Guy: He simply doesn't have a mean bone in his body (most of the time). Despite all the hardship he endures, he remains consistently kind-hearted and friendly to everyone around him. He even convinces Sawyer to be nicer to people.
Noodle Incident: How he got the nickname "Hurley"; he explicitly tells Jack that he'd rather not say how he came by it.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Despite all the "Dudes" he often turns out to be the one with the solution to a problem. In fact he's often the one who realizes there's a problem in the first place.
Odd Friendship:
After initial tensions between them (including a memorable incident where Sawyer mocked Hurley's metal health issues and took a beating for it), Hurley forms a surprisingly strong bond with Sawyer after conning him into stepping up as a leader for the camp; by the end of season 4, Sawyer openly threatens to kill Ben and Locke if they harm a hair on Hurley's head.
Hurley and Ben form a strange friendship over the course of the last few seasons. At the end of the series, they work together to protect the Island, and in the afterlife are clearly happy to see each other.
There are elements of this to his dynamic with Miles in Season 5. While Miles at first seems to be generally annoyed by Hurley's presence (his cynical Deadpan Snarker attitude conflicting with Hurley's comedic nature), the two strike up a rapport when talking about the implications of time travel. Hurley later helps Miles muster up the courage to speak with his father.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Most people don't even know that Hurley isn't his real name, though Locke and Ben call him Hugo almost exclusively.
Only Sane Man: Regularly shown to be the only person on the Island who realizes that keeping secrets from each other is what keeps causing them major problems, and that if the Losties don't find some way to relax, they'll go insane. Hence, he built them a golf course. As of the finale, he's likely the first Protector of the Island who can actually be said to be competent. Ironically, he is this despite being the only one with diagnosed mental illnesses and who previously served them in a mental hospital.
Plucky Comic Relief: Moreso in the early seasons, where his happy-go-lucky kindness offsets some of the more selfish mindsets of the other survivors.
Pop-Cultured Badass: Along with Sawyer, he's the one with the most pop-culture references.
Sad Clown: Hurley is funny, but he's had more than his fair share of tragedy.
Secretly Wealthy: He looks like a working class guy who probably has little more than the clowns on his back but he has a vast fortune from his lottery winnings and
Stout Strength: His heavy build isn't just fat as proves to be surprisingly strong, easily overpowering and beating up Sawyer when he finally loses it with him.
Survivor's Guilt: Hurley has a great deal of this due to a deck accident. He's convinced his weight brought the deck down and he was responsible for the deaths of the other people on it, but it was far over capacity as it was.
Took a Level in Badass: In the Season 3 finale, where he pulls a Big Damn Heroes with the Dharma van. Takes another one in the Season 6 premiere. By the end of the series, he's become the protector of the island.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: In the season 4 premiere, Hurley becomes the biggest advocate for those who want to go with Locke instead of Jack, proclaiming that he trusts the recently-deceased Charlie more than he trusts either of them and Charlie told them not to trust the people on the freighter. Unfortunately, the freighter team ends up attacking Locke's group first and almost all of their group is killed.