Action Girl: Juliet is a stone-cold badass and one of the best combatants in the series. She flips Kate over with the skill of a mixed martial artist, frequently gets the better of other people, and is a crack shot with a pistol. Even when she's injured, she just pops her dislocated shoulder back in.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: With Edmund Burke, Goodwin and especially with Sawyer.
Ambiguously Evil: Season 3 plays around with what side Juliet is really on, with her aiding the survivors and working as Ben's mole in their camp in the same episode. By the end, it's made clear that she has fully defected to the survivors' side and is working with Jack to derail Ben's plans.
Anti-Villain: Juliet's affiliation with the Others is extremely reluctant and predicated largely on her attempts to solve the fertility issues that the group was having; more or less the instant she has an opportunity, Juliet throws in with the survivors and remains firmly on their side for the rest of the series.
Back for the Finale: Like everyone, she returns in the finale.
Badass Bookworm: She hosts her own book club and is a fan of Carrie.
Betty and Veronica: The Betty to Kate's Veronica for Sawyer's Archie.
Beware the Nice Ones: Juliet is sweetly charming but cross her and she will put you down without hesitation.
Break the Cutie: Poor, adorable Juliet goes through absolute hell both on-island and off, usually due to Edmund Burke or Ben Linus.
Cut the Safety Rope: Of the "letting go of hands" variety.
Dark Action Girl: Before abandoning the Others in favor of the Survivors.
Deadpan Snarker: No amount of trauma can stop her snark.
Sawyer: So, you screwing Jack yet?
Juliet: No, are you?

Sawyer: [after his food gets stuck in a vending machine, Juliet catches him reaching into it] It's okay, I'm a cop.
Juliet: Then why don't you read the machine its rights?
Defecting for Love: At first, she shows romantic interest in Jack but later falls in love with Sawyer. Then dies. A bit of an expansion: the Others and the Losties were usually opposing forces, similar to the Montagues and Capulets. Juliet was The Dragon to Ben until her Heel–Face Turn.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Played straight but also inverted in her backstory. In the three years since she'd been an Other, she pretty much completely froze over.
Despair Event Horizon: Comes close on several occasions, resulting in her personality change during her time with the Others. She crosses it when she realises that the life she and Sawyer built for themselves on the island is ending forever. This brings on her Heroic BSoD at the end of Season 5.
The Dog Bites Back: Via cue cards — "Ignore everything I'm saying." "Ben is a liar" "...And he's very dangerous." "But it has to look like an accident." "It's a very complicated surgery. No one would ever know."
Establishing Character Moment: One of her earliest episodes demonstrated that she doesn't mess around. When Sawyer and Kate acted out of line, she aimed a gun at Kate's head. And Sawyer commented that she would've done it too without even batting a lash.
Everyone Has Standards: Despite everything the adult Ben put her through, when the young Ben is shot by Sayid, Juliet does everything in her power to save his life, contrasting Jack's refusal to help.
Jack: That kid is Ben.
Juliet: He's not Ben yet. He's just a kid.
Expository Hairstyle Change: The flashbacks to before came to the Island show her with curly hair. By the present day it's much straighter, reflecting how hardened she's become by her experiences.
Extreme Doormat: Before joining the Others, she worked for her ex-husband who walked all over her and flaunted his affair with his sexy new assistant. It took a literal Bus Crash to free her.
Heel–Face Turn: She leaves the Others to join the Survivors, acting as a mole.
Heroic Sacrifice: Juliet detonates the hydrogen bomb to reverse the timeline, being fatally wounded in the process.
Hospital Hottie: Ed Burke, Goodwin, Ben, Jack and Sawyer all agree she's extremely attractive. She's a tall, stunning blonde who also happens to be a highly skilled OB/GYN.
Iconic Sequel Character: Made her first appearance in the third season premiere and ultimately the only character introduced after the second season to appear in the Grand Finale's final scene.
Informed Attribute: Apparently, she looks uncannily similar to Sarah, Jack's ex-wife. The only real resemblance is that they're both blonde. This is lampshaded by the cue cards Juliet uses to secretly communicate with Jack; the season 3 DVD boxset shows that the last one reads "and your ex-wife is much prettier than me". note 
Insecure Love Interest: Juliet's parents divorced when she was a child, and the negative effect that had on her is visible in the romances she pursues as an adult; despite her beauty, charm, and intellect, Juliet is never quite comfortable in her relationships, and some of her partners have been less than decent people. Her ex-husband Edmund was a rude jerk who flaunted his new relationships in her face, Goodwin was married (albeit unhappily) and may have developed feelings for Ana Lucia, and Jack, though a good man, was in love with Kate, and Juliet knew it. Even after forming a happy relationship with Sawyer, the moment Kate came back, Juliet's insecurities bubbled up again and she was sure that her romance with Sawyer was doomed, which drove her to support Jack's plan in the season 5 finale, which led to her own death.
The Lancer: After Sawyer takes over as leader in Season 5 with Jack and Locke both off the Island, Juliet becomes his Lancer, firmly committing to always having Sawyer's back, even when she thinks his "plans" are terrible. This eventually leads to the pair getting together.
Meaningful Name: Much like her namesake, she ends up one half of a pair of Star-Crossed Lovers.
The Medic: For the Others and the Survivors. She helps Sun with her pregnancy.
The Mole: Ben sends her to infiltrate the Survivors, but it's revealed that when she joined them, she instantly confided her true role in Jack. From there on, she pretended to aid the Others while truly helping the Survivors.
Nice Girl: Despite her traumas and deceptively hard edge, Juliet is a sweet, charming woman whose main interest is in doing what's best for others.
Noodle Incident: When Kate dislocates her shoulder in "Left Behind" she shrugs it off and says that's the fourth time it's happened to that shoulder. We never learn what caused the first three dislocations.
Not So Stoic:
When Juliet first appears, she's a very cold, clinical person with an even voice and logical tone. However, when she leaves the Others and settles with the Survivors, she shows a more genuine side, appearing bright, friendly, warm and considerate.
Normally, Juliet is very calm under pressure, but when a young Widmore threatens to cut off her arms (intending to hack off one just to show he's serious), Juliet is clearly panicked and afraid.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: She gives a coldly logical speech to Sawyer and Sayid, calling them out on their distrust of her.
"You know, it's interesting that you two are now the camp's moral police. I'm curious, Sayid, how long was it before you told everyone on that beach exactly how many people you've tortured in your life. Do they know about Basra? And I'm sure the first thing you did when you got here, James, was to gather everyone in a circle, and tell them about the man you shot in cold blood the night before you got on the plane. So why don't we just skip the part where you two pretend to be righteous. I'm taking that medication back to Claire. And you're gonna let me. Because if she doesn't get it, she's gonna die. And the last thing that either of you need right now, is more blood on your hands."
Romantic Runner-Up: Plays this three times over, with her ex-husband flaunting his sleeping around with younger women in her face, knowing that her lover Goodwin probably had feelings for another woman (Ana Lucia) before he was killed, and losing Jack to Kate. It's the possibility of having this happen a fourth time, losing Sawyer to Kate, that causes her insecurities to rise to the top and eventually leads to her death.
"Shaggy Dog" Story: She never gets off the island to see her sister again, even in the afterlife.
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: Watch her normal cool, soft-spoken nature, and then watch her big smile when Sawyer brings her a flower.
Statuesque Stunner: At 5'9" she's one of the taller female characters.
The Stoic: Most of the time, Juliet is cool and even-tempered. Even after watching the freighter explode (and with it her biggest hope of getting off the Island and, as far as Juliet knows, half a dozen of her friends), Juliet just drinks on the beach without breaking down, her lack of outward emotion initially making an oblivious Sawyer think she's celebrating their imminent escape.
Take My Hand!: Sawyer desperately tries this to save her. It ultimately isn't enough.
Took a Level in Badass: She used to be an Extreme Doormat. Now, not so much.
Would Not Hurt A Child: Even given the chance to avoid her the terrible things Ben put her through, she won't hurt his younger self.
Juliet: That kid was bleeding out. You're a surgeon, and I needed you.
Jack: That kid is Ben.
Juliet: It's not Ben yet. He's just a kid.
Wrench Wench: As a member of the DHARMA Initiative.
Working with the Ex: With Edmund in flashbacks and Jack in the flash-sideways.