Action Girl: She has plenty of combat experience, and she's a pretty good shot too.
After-Action Patch-Up: Her first interaction with Jack has her stitching up a wound in his side.
Ambiguously Christian: Kate uses the names of saints as aliases while on the run, and she knows enough about Catholicism to start a habit of phoning Mars on Holy Days of Obligation, but she never admits to any specific religious beliefs of her own.
Anguished Declaration of Love: She gives one to Jack, realizing his choice to stay behind to die, after giving him a parting kiss.
Anti-Hero: Although genuinely well-meaning for the most part, Kate has a definite selfish streak and a bad habit of applying different standards to herself than she does to anyone else. Character Development helps soothe Kate's worse qualities, and she ends the series much closer to a straight-up hero.
Badass in Distress: Despite her badassness, Kate gets inexplicably caught on multiple occassions, the most blatant example being on Season 2 when she gets caught by the Others and used to send the group searching for Michael back to camp.
Betty and Veronica:
The Archie for Jack's Betty and Sawyer's Veronica. She ends up being Jack's "soulmate", while Sawyer ends up with Juliet.
The Veronica to Juliet's Betty for Sawyer's Archie. This Love Triangle doesn't last so long, as by the time Kate returns to the island, Sawyer has already become adamant that Juliet's the one for him.
Beware the Nice Ones: One of the early reasons Jack trusts Kate seems to be motivated on her good-girl attitude. It's how Kate gets out of many scrapes, by pretending to be sweet and innocent.
Big Damn Heroes: Deals the finishing blow to the Man in Black in the series finale.
Blatant Lies: In "Born to Run", Kate, despite admitting that she's a fugitive, remarks that she's going to jail no matter what she "supposedly" did; "What Kate Did" reveals that she absolutely did commit murder, and almost all of her flashbacks feature her committing at least one crime, ranging from fraud to assault.
AB Negative: She reveals she's a universal donor when she volunteers to donate blood to young Ben Linus after Sayid shoots him.
Buxom Beauty Standard: A lot of the guys focus and ogle her large chest like in "Catch-22" when Sawyer is so mesmerized about seeing her in just a bra that she has to tell him "I'm up here" to get him to stop Eating the Eye Candy or in "House of the Rising Sun" when Charlie stares at her in bra after the bee incident and then makes a Boob-Based Gag about her cup size.
Charlie Oh, and uh, someone left this.
Kate: [Charlie hands Kate her shirt] It was, uh…it was full of bees.
Charlie: I'd have thought C's, actually. [Kate glares at him] Sorry.
Cannot Spit It Out: She's worse than Sawyer when it comes to admitting her feelings. Most of her confessions come during times of stress.
Childhood Friend Romance: With her friend Tom, which included a childhood marriage promise and all... unfortunately, he dies in the same flashback episode he's introduced of an Instant Death Bullet.
Damsel in Distress: Kate might be a badass, but she's also the character who gets kidnapped the most. The Others seem to constantly kidnap her. This also corresponds to her being in custody while on the plane.
Dead Person Impersonation: Near the end of Season 1, Kate tried to steal Sawyer's place on the raft, planning to, if they found rescue, pose as the late Joanna, who had drowned earlier in the season, thus allowing her to escape justice yet again. Sawyer puts the kibosh on this plan, revealing Kate's intentions and her criminal past to the survivors at large.
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: Shot The Man in Black just as he was about to kill Jack.
Kate: I saved you a bullet!
Establishing Character Moment: Despite being scared and initially unsure of whether she can do it, Kate sutures a wound that Jack can't reach, showing that, for all her uncertainties on the subject, Kate is a good person who wants to help others.
Everyone Has Standards:
Kate's flashbacks in "Whatever the Case May Be" show that she was perfectly willing to stage a bank robbery for her own benefit, but she drew the line at unnecessary killing; when her partner (and lover) tried to shoot the bank manager, Kate shot him and their other two accomplices and left them for the police.
Kate is aghast at Jack and Sayid's willingness to torture Sawyer in "Confidence Man".
Despite everything the adult Ben did to the survivors, Kate is unwilling to let the child Ben die after he's been shot by Sayid.
Fatal Flaw: She suffers from an intense case of self-loathing, which often causes her to make selfish decisions that alienates the people that she cares about.
Heel–Face Turn: She was a fugitive being taken from Australia back to the U.S. by a government agent. But after the crash, she's clearly a good guy.
Honorary Aunt: After leaving the island for the first time she tracks down Sawyer's daughter, who happens to also be the child of Kate's friend Cassidy. Clementine eventually starts calling her "Auntie Kate".
I Have Many Names: Kate adopts many aliases while on the run, including Annie, Maggie Ryan, Joan Hart, and Monica Callis.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Kate can be self-righteous, on top of being a liar and a murderer, but, even on the run, she had a decent streak that never quite went away, and which becomes one of her defining traits on the Island.
Kill It with Fire: How she murdered her father—causing an explosion that took the entire house.
The Lancer: Though Kate acts as Jack's conscience for most of the show, she becomes his Lancer in Season 5 after the Oceanic Six leave the Island, as Sayid drifts away from the rest of the survivors to become Ben's hired killer. Kate is the first person to agree to Jack's proposal that the group lie about the Island when they return to civilisation, and she assures him that she will always have his back, though she does try to talk him out of some of his more reckless actions like returning to the Island, refusing to save young Ben when Sayid shoots him, and detonating the Jughead bomb to prevent the crash of Oceanic 815.
Last Kiss: With Jack after he's mortally wounded.
Love Triangle: She's involved in a very long lasting one with Jack and Sawyer.
Mad Libs Catch Phrase: "My name's not [insert alias]".
Mama Bear: To Aaron. She's willing to go to prison rather than let her toxic mother near him, and even kicks Jack out when his behaviour becomes too erratic.
Moral Myopia:
Kate has an unfortunate tendency to do this, often taking the moral high ground despite being a fugitive and murderer who isn't above manipulating people for her own ends. At one point she lectures Locke about love while refusing to rescue a man who did love her and the real mother of her adopted son.
In general, Kate never seems to wrap her head around the fact that, no matter how much of a piece of garbage Wayne may have been or what her intentions were, it didn't give her the right to murder him. When she asks Sam Austen why he didn't kill Wayne, Sam replied that he "[didn't] have murder in my heart", subtly calling Kate out for what she'd done.
In "Born to Run", Kate is visibly downbeat when everyone gives her the cold shoulder, despite the fact that she was genuinely exposed as a criminal. Her anger at Sawyer for exposing her falls flat for much the same reason.
Ms. Fanservice: We get our fair share of shower and sponge-bath scenes.
My Eyes Are Up Here: To Sawyer, when he sees her getting dressed.
Parental Substitute: After Claire disappears and doesn't get off the island with them, Kate adopts her son Aaron.
Patricide: Upon realising that her hated and abusive stepfather was her biological father, Kate murdered him.
Rebellious Spirit: The best way to get Kate to do something is to tell her to do the opposite.
Save the Villain: Saves young Ben when he's shot by Sayid.
Scarily Competent Tracker: Of the original Losties, although she pales in comparison to Locke.
Secretly Selfish: Although his abusive treatment of her mother and repulsive leering at her were contributing factors, Kate admits to what may or may not have been Wayne's ghost that she murdered him out of disgust at the knowledge that he was her biological father, hating the idea that someone so disgusting was a part of her and fearing that it meant she could never be a good person.
Sex for Solace: She has sex with Sawyer after seeing how close Jack has become to Juliet.
Themed Aliases: She uses the names of Saints when on the run.
Took a Level in Badass: After killing her father, she started down the badass path.
Toplessness from the Back: Early in Season 3. It sets off Sawyer's heartbeat monitor.