All for Nothing: All the strife and moral compromise Michael undergoes to reunite with his son and escape from the Island ends up destroying his and Walt's relationship, and Michael ends up spending the last weeks of his life as a suicidal wreck, returning to the Island to die.
Apologetic Attacker: After Ana Lucia gives him her gun to murder "Henry", Michael says "I'm sorry"; when Ana asks what he's sorry for, Michael shoots her dead.
Armor-Piercing Question: Is on the receiving end of one when Hurley asks him if he would've allowed Libby to live if she hadn't scared him into shooting her, given that she had already seen him kill Ana Lucia. He's not given the chance to respond, but he clearly has no idea what to say.
The Atoner: The guilt he feels for killing Ana Lucia and Libby combined with the loss of Walt results in Michael returning to the Island to atone for his sins (specifically intending to die for them).
Back for the Dead: He returns in Season 4 for a few episodes before dying onboard the Kahana. It's lampshaded.
Bad Liar: When he has to bring only a certain group of survivors to the Others, Michael proves he can't tell a lie under pressure to save his life; his desperation, lack of logic, and insistence on including Hurley of all people, yet not Sayid who has actual combat experience, tips his hand too far. To make matters worse, he had already burnt the list of detailing the names of said survivors that the Others wanted. Jack and Sayid are on to him almost immediately and only go along with it because they think doing so gives them the upper hand.
The Bus Came Back: For Season 4, Michael returns as Ben's inside man on the freighter.
Butt-Monkey: Poor guy never can catch a break. His girlfriend's pregnancy means he has to give up his art (which is his real passion), she subsequently cheats on him, leaves him, practically steals his son from him, moves to Australia with her boss/lover, then she dies and the stepfather foists him off on Michael who's estranged from him, they crash on an island with monsters, his son is kidnapped by the Others, Michael falls apart mentally, gets taken by the Others himself, Forced into Evil, has to live under the radar with his son, is consumed with guilt to the point of becoming suicidal, loses his son to estrangement, dies and then he can't even move on to the afterlife because the guilt is too much!
Catchphrase: WAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAALT!!!
Cosmic Plaything: His girlfriend left him and took their son, despite Michael actually being a good and loving partner and dad; it doesn't really get any better for him after that.
Death by Irony: Ben sent Michael to blow up the Freighter; Michael's death comes about after his heroic attempts to prevent the Freighter from blowing up finally fail.
Death Seeker: When he returns to the island, he tells Sayid and Desmond that he's 'here to die'. He's well aware that he can't walk back the damage he's caused so he's just there to die in a manner that may grant him some redemption.
Despair Event Horizon: After killing Ana and Libby, he started to lose his mind. Attempting to kill himself, first with a car and then with a gun, also count.
Did Not Think This Through: Michael is so desperate to protect his son at ANY cost to the point that his thinking ability becomes narrow. Having come back to camp after his dealing with the Others and forced to do their bidding, you would think that he would turn to Jack and Sayid for help in what the Others want him to do to free their leader. Nope. Instead, his plan is to shoot two women and himself in the shoulder to make it look like Ben did it and escaped. To make matters worse, he burns that list of people that the Others had wanted him to bring which he could've used as evidence, which erases any chance of the survivors understanding what is happening. This suspicious behaviour already tips off Sayid who knows that Michael has been compromised.
Disappeared Dad: Was one himself before the start of the show, though involuntary. Walt's mother took Walt to Europe with her and ended up starting a new life, never giving Michael an opportunity to connect with his son.
Driven to Suicide: Michael's overwhelming guilt over what he'd done to save Walt pushes him to attempt suicide several times after leaving the Island, either by ramming his car into a wall or trying to shoot himself in the head. No attempt works because, as Tom tells him, the Island isn't done with Michael yet.
The Everyman: His past doesn't involve fame, crime, murder, destiny or incest. He's the closest to 'ordinary' the cast gets. Naturally, his life is horrible.
Fatal Flaw: Insecurity, and eventually his desperate need to protect his son prove to be his downfall. The Others exploit this second flaw in order to make him free Ben, which breaks him psychologically and has him riddled with guilt.
Fate Worse than Death: Tragically, even after his death, Michael's spirit is forced to remain on the island as part of the whispers and cannot move on. In the epilogue of the series, it is hinted that Walt returning to the island might save his father's spirit.
Fire-Forged Friends: Michael eventually becomes friends with Locke, Jin and Sawyer despite their initial clashes: Michael's suspicion of Locke spending time with Walt, Jin's seemingly unprompted attack of Michael and Sawyer's general jerkishness. By season 4, Jin is the only person on the Island who is genuinely happy to see Michael again.
Forced into Evil: By the Others. Ben dodges responsibility later, saying that his orders didn't involve killing anyone, just freeing him.
Heroic Sacrifice: Sent to blow up a freighter, gets blown up in the freighter, though he manages to save some lives before that happens, most notably Desmond and Jin.
Hidden Depths: It's not dwelled on, but the information Ben has on all of the freighter crew is ridiculously extensive (including full names and Keamy's presumably restricted military history), suggesting Michael was actually a really successful mole.
I Cannot Self-Terminate: The Island refuses to allow Michael to kill himself, forcing him to return. When he finally does die, it's from a Heroic Sacrifice.
Last Request: When Hurley finds Michael's spirit on the Island, before they part for the last time, Michael asks Hurley to tell Libby that he's sorry if he ever sees her again. Hurley promises he'll do so.
Love Makes You Evil: Michael's love for his son is the driving force behind his murders of Ana Lucia and Libby and his betrayal of the other survivors.
A Million Is a Statistic: He's comfortable with the idea of blowing up a freighter full of people if it means saving his former friends, but once he actually gets to know them as people, he starts having doubts. Tom gets him back on track by pointing out that for all of the individuals he may now know on the freighter, there are even more people on the Island that he cares about and needs to protect.
The Mole: On Widmore's freighter. He's employed as a deckhand while secretly working for Ben.
My God, What Have I Done?: Michael is riddled with guilt over killing Ana Lucia and Libby (especially for Libby, since he never intended to kill her and only did so because she called out his name, causing him to panic), even going so far as to confess his crimes to Walt, who is horrified by his father's actions and subsequently stays with Michael's mother.
Nice Guy: Not to the point of being a doormat, and he certainly has his temperamental moments, but on the whole Michael was a decent man who was considerate of others. He had big opportunities to tear down Susan and Brian in Walt's eyes, but didn't take them, choosing to let Walt think they were good people instead of jerks. Even his most heinous actions were done to save his son and left him with crippling regret.
Odd Friendship: With Jin, considering how they started. Notably, Jin is the last physical person that Michael interacts with while he is alive, and his last words are for Jin to escape and reunite with Sun while he stays behind and keeps the boat bomb at bay.
Papa Wolf: Michael would do absolutely anything for Walt, even murder two innocent women and lure several others into a trap. The guilt eats him up inside, but he does it anyway if it means saving Walt.
Parents as People: Michael loves his son more than anything, but he's also human, and as a result, he makes some dumb decisions along the way. It takes quite some time for him and Walt to have a positive relationship because Michael's desperation to leave clashes with Walt's desire to stay, and in the end Michael blows up that relationship anyway because he confesses his sins to him without considering the guilt and trauma it would give him.
Put on a Bus: At the end of Season 2, the Others live up to their end of the bargain and allow him and Walt to leave the island on a boat. See The Boat Came Back for what happens in Season 4.
Redemption Equals Death: He saves the lives of Jin, Desmond, Sun, Aaron, Kate, Jack, Sawyer, Faraday and Hurley by staying behind on the boat to keep the bomb frozen. It does explode anyway, but he buys them enough time to get the helicopter in the air. Though they never outright say as much, Jack and Hurley clearly forgive him after this, with Jack citing Michael as an example of the people they've lost because of those who know about the Island and Hurley working with Ben to bring Walt back to the Island to help Michael move on after he's stuck as a Whisper.
Secret-Keeper: He's the first person on the Island to learn that Sun speaks English and keeps this information a secret until she reveals it to the camp on her own.
Throw the Dog a Bone: Walt is brought to the island to help Michael eventually move on in the epilogue.
Tragic Villain: Michael was just a good-hearted man dealt a very bad hand, and made some dumb decisions along the way. He killed Ana Lucia and Libby to save his son, and the guilt subsequently destroys him.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: His attempt to leave the Island via raft leads to his group meeting the Tailies, kickstarting the chain of events that ends with Shannon's death.
Wounded Gazelle Gambit: After he shoots Ana Lucia and Libby and frees Ben, he shoots himself in the shoulder to make it look like Ben escaped and shot him, along with Ana Lucia and Libby, to gain sympathy from the survivors.