All Girls Want Bad Boys: Played straight in flashbacks where he seduces women with his bad boy persona. Subverted on the island, since Kate and Juliet only start to fall for him when he exhibits his selfless, considerate side.
And This Is for...: Invoked when he shoots and kills Tom in the Season 3 finale, saying that it was for his role in abducting Walt at the end of Season 1.
Sawyer: That's for taking the kid off the raft.
Badass Bookworm: Loves reading almost as much as Ben.
Bad Guys Do the Dirty Work: After a fashion, his killing of Anthony Cooper qualifies as this. Locke couldn't bring himself to kill his father, and after learning that Cooper had ruined Sawyer's life as well, gave Sawyer the opportunity to take his revenge.
Battle in the Rain: A short-lived one, with Pickett.
Becoming the Mask: A pivotal part of his backstory. In pursuit of "Sawyer", the con man who destroyed his family, young James Ford had to travel in the same circles and eventually became a con man himself to survive. This is the reason he calls himself "Sawyer", and the source of his self-loathing.
Beneath the Mask: Within his Hidden Heart of Gold, Sawyer is deeply self-loathing and regretful of his actions.
Best Served Cold: Sawyer has been plotting revenge since he was a small boy.
Betty and Veronica: The Veronica to Jack's Betty for Kate's Archie. He's also the Archie for Kate's Veronica and Juliet's Betty.
Book Dumb: He's poorly educated but highly intelligent, very charismatic and well-read.
Catchphrase: Sawyer's go-to curse is "son of a bitch". Jack borrows it after Sawyer tells him that Hurley is with Ben, who has Keamy and his men on his trail.
Con Man: A large part of his back story, and the reason he was able to form a life in the Dharma Initiative for himself, Juliet, Miles, and Jin.
Consummate Liar: As a con man, his ability to lie is vital. The only better liar than Sawyer is probably Ben.
Cowboy Cop: In the alternate reality. It probably isn't necessary to sleep with your target.
Dark and Troubled Past: His father killed his mother, then killed himself...which a then eight-year-old Sawyer witnessed. From there on, he became a con man and became a self-loathing directionless mess obsessing over his revenge.
Deadpan Snarker: The premier source of snarking on Lost, although Ben and Miles compete admirably. His number of snarky lines are too vast to list.
Death Seeker: Michael notices it, and Sawyer vaguely confirms.
Michael: Since the day you told me you wanted on this raft, I couldn't figure it out. Why does a guy who only cares about himself want to risk his life to save everyone else? Yeah... way I see it, there's only two choices. You're either a hero, or you want to die.
Sawyer: Well... I ain't no hero, Mike.
Disappeared Dad: Is this to his daughter Clementine. He initially refused to believe she was his and avoided contacting her beyond putting some money aside for her. When Kate gets the opportunity to leave the Island Sawyer asks her to look Clementine up and check on her for him.
Don't You Dare Pity Me!: Due to his self-loathing, Sawyer not only takes the idea of being hated and ostracized in stride, in fact, he welcomes it. But when Kate expresses pity for him, it clearly touches a nerve, being the first thing that is shown to visibly tick him off. Later, when he ends up confessing the details his backstory to her, he becomes downright angry at the look of sorrow and sympathy on her face and demands that she leave him alone.
Drowning My Sorrows: After Juliet's death, he gets drunk in his old DHARMA home.
Entitled Bastard: He regularly expects people he treats like shit to give him the benefit of the doubt or drop everything and help him and is shocked when they tell him where he can go instead.
Everyone Has Standards:
While conning a couple out of their life savings after seducing the wife, Sawyer immediately abandons the entire con when he sees the couple's young son; Sawyer may have become what he hated by taking up the life of a confidence man, but he was not willing to subject an innocent child to what he went through as a boy.
For all his hard edges and bad attitude, Sawyer is not a cold-blooded man; his failure to properly euthanize Mars leaves him badly shaken, inadvertently murdering the innocent Frank Duckett haunts him deeply, and even in murdering Anthony Cooper, the man who destroyed his family, Sawyer is physically ill from the shock of his actions and remains shaken for days afterward.
Though Sawyer is perfectly willing to stir the pot among the other survivors in the early seasons, he's usually one of the first to intervene if someone else starts instigating something, such as when he helps Sayid split up Jin and Michael and gives Sayid the handcuffs to restrain Jin after the latter attacks Michael for seemingly no reason.
Sawyer's all but murderously protective of his stash, but he generally makes an exception for Aaron, such as immediately offering up medicine when he believes Aaron's sick.
Fatal Flaw: He lacks trust in others, and his Jerkass behavior often tends to push people away from him because, as Kate points out, he hates himself.
Fire-Forged Friends: Once he begins to put more trust into people, he develops a friendship with most of his fellow survivors, such as Jin, Sun, Charlie, Hurley, and Claire. He even begins to show a level of protectiveness around Hurley and Claire, who aren't fighters.
When he and the other survivors get transported to 1974, he also develops this with Miles and Daniel.
Freak Out: He loses it when he finally confronts the first Sawyer, Anthony Cooper, quickly going from Tranquil Fury to Unstoppable Rage. Especially when Cooper destroys the letter he wrote to Mr. Sawyer as a boy. And Sawyer is pretty messed up for a while after violently killing him.
Freudian Excuse: Seeing his dad murder his mother then turn the gun on himself instilled a lifelong mission inside James Ford to find the man responsible for that and kill him. That mission eventually turned him into the same type of con man he was hunting.
Friend to All Children: Friend is pushing it, but he's less abrasive and rude to Alex and Karl, such as telling Karl that if he loves Alex, then she's worth saving, and shows some friendliness and compassion to Walt and Aaron.
When Charlie discovers Sawyer's voice actually calms Aaron down, Sawyer protests being babysitter. But then later he relents and begins reading magazines while Aaron sleeps. He even provides extra food and blankets for Claire and Aaron (though at Hurley's suggestion). In "Left Behind" Claire allows Sawyer to hold him, which Sawyer grins slightly while doing.
Guile Hero: After he grows out of his Jerkass behaviour, Sawyer starts using his con man talents for the betterment of the survivors, managing to get them an in with the DHARMA Initiative after being trapped in the 1970's.
Heartbroken Badass: In Season 6, following Juliet's death and the complete destruction of the life he'd built with her.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Miles. It's more prominent in Purgatory but they are quite close in both universes.
He Who Fights Monsters: He became a conman while trying to find a conman. That said, he does prove that he isn't without scruples, abandoning a con (at risk of physical harm) rather than risk an innocent child losing his family the way Sawyer himself did.
Hidden Depths: Despite his brash exterior, Sawyer is a well-read and highly intelligent man.
Hidden Heart of Gold: Sawyer is filled with self-loathing; Kate hits the nail on the head when she accuses him of wanting to be hated by people. At his core, Sawyer is a good man. He eventually tosses off his Jerkass facade to reveal himself as a caring, considerate and observant man. He also starts to become fiercely protective of his fellow survivors.
Hot-Blooded: Sawyer's almost always ready for a fight and will freely instigate problems where there weren't any.
Hyper-Awareness: Sawyer instantly realizes that "Locke" isn't who he appears to be.
It's All About Me: Immensely so at first. Sawyer makes repeatedly clear that he cares about one person: Sawyer. It takes two and a half seasons, but he grows out of it.
Jerkass: Big-time, when we first meet him. Sawyer starts a fight, throws racist accusations, behaves with smug derision to his fellow survivors and robs from the dead. Early on, he was incredibly hated due to his opportunistic ways and general lack of co-operation.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Sawyer isn't a very nice man, and he isn't always a good man either. But he proves to be a good man at heart as he begins to take a more responsible and caring attitude towards his fellow survivors.
Kick the Dog:
Some of his nicknames cross into this territory, particularly his frequent jabs at Hurley's weight.
His first centric episode is basically one long dog kicking session; instead of simply telling Boone that he didn't have Shannon's inhaler, Sawyer beats him up, then maintains the illusion that he does have it, even trying to manipulate Kate into kissing him in exchange for it. When she finally gives in (after Sawyer has been tied up and tortured by Sayid), Sawyer admits he never had the inhaler at all. Kate later surmises that Sawyer's motive wasn't simple cruelty, however; having deduced his backstory, she realizes that he's wracked with self-loathing and is punishing himself by making other people hate him.
After Hurley helps him find a treefrog that had been annoying Sawyer with its croaking, Sawyer responds to Hurley's suggestion of releasing the frog into the jungle somewhere far from Sawyer's tent by crushing the frog in his fist.
When Hurley asks about Sawyer having heard voices in the jungle, Sawyer slickly talks him into admitting that he's been seeing someone who isn't there. Sawyer then pretends to see said person as a particularly mean joke on Hurley, laughing in his face about it. Hurley doesn't let him laugh for long.
Ladykiller in Love: With Juliet.
The Lancer:
Though Sawyer often plays Commander Contrarian to Jack's decisions in the first two seasons, he becomes his Lancer in Season 3 after Locke leaves the survivors to join the Others. Sawyer clashes with Jack over whether or not to trust Juliet, but he is ultimately in his most supportive role to Jack in the entire show during this period. As always, Sawyer's rough Con Man personality contrasts with Jack being an esteemed doctor.
In Seasons 4 and 5, after they split from the main survivors and when the Oceanic Six leave the Island, Locke becomes The Leader of his own faction with Sawyer as his Lancer. Locke is a straight-talking mystic who is searching for answers to the Island's mysteries, while Sawyer is a duplicitous Con Man who only cares about surviving and regards Locke's faith in the Island and its powers with skepticism. However, Sawyer grows to gain respect and Undying Loyalty for Locke, promising to wait "as long as it takes" for Locke to return when he leaves the Island to bring back the Oceanic Six.
Last-Name Basis: His fake name Jim LaFleur among the 1970s DHARMA Initiative is generally referred to as simply LaFleur.
Manipulative Bastard: He is manipulative of his fellow survivors in early seasons. For example, he claimed to be in possession of Shannon's asthma medication and promised to hand it over for a kiss from Kate: it is revealed after the kiss that he never had the medication in the first place.
Meaningful Name: Both in-universe and out. Sawyer is commonly associated with Mark Twain's cocky trickster Tom Sawyer, which certainly fits with him. In-universe, it's the alias of the man indirectly responsible for the deaths of Sawyer's parents. When he came to realize he'd become what he hated by conning people out of money, James Ford took the name Sawyer to reflect his disgust with himself.
Mr. Fanservice: Sawyer gets more than his fair share of shirtless scenes.
My God, What Have I Done?:
After killing Frank Duckett and realizing that he'd been manipulated by Hibbs.
After he realises that he failed to euthanize Mars, Sawyer is horrified as he realises that all he did was worsen the man's suffering.
When his refusal to listen to Jack and tampering of the bomb leads to the deaths of Sayid, Jin, and Sun. Even when Jack would rather blame the Man in Black than him, Sawyer remains unconvinced.
My Parents Are Dead: In a Murder-Suicide.
Nerd Glasses: Part of his charm.
Never My Fault: He spends most of Season 1 bitching and moaning about how people hate him and accuse him of lying and stealing. It seemingly never occurred to him that that was because he usually was lying and stealing and people didn't like him because he treated everyone around him horribly at every opportunity.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: When the Man in Black slips a bomb onto the sub, Sawyer tampers with the bomb, and the resulting explosion leads to the deaths of Sayid, Jin, and Sun.
The Nicknamer: Compulsively. For a period in Season 3, he's forbidden from using nicknames (he lost a bet) and clearly struggles with it.
Only Known by Their Nickname: In the first few seasons, Sawyer is the only name anyone knows him by, but that's only the name he took when he became a con man (Hurley implicitly knows his real name from the manifest, but that's it); it's to the point that when the Others recruit Michael to kidnap him, they have to clarify who "James Ford" is. This becomes subverted starting in season 5, when he starts being called James almost exclusively.
Only One Name: When he's not referred to by his real name, he's only referred to as Sawyer; though his namesake, Anthony Cooper, took the full name of Tom Sawyer for his cons, it's never clear if Sawyer ever included a first name in his persona.
OOC Is Serious Business: When the situation calls for it, he will drop his usual persona and take action. When Kate comes rushing to Sawyer in search of alcohol for Boone (who has been gravely injured), he is about to drop a snarky comment before realizing how serious she is and wastes no time giving up his entire stash of alcohol before apologizing for not having enough. He even offers to come help, but Kate declines.
Out of Focus: He goes thirty-eight episodes and nearly two full seasons without a centric episode, starting with the fourth episode of Season 3 and finally getting another Day in the Limelight in the eight episode of Season 5. Somewhat downplayed however, as despite the complete void of centric episodes in the middle of the series, he very much remains an important character.
Pay Evil unto Evil:
Upon realizing that Anthony Cooper is the "Mr. Sawyer" he's been after for nearly 30 years, Sawyer tries to make him own up to his crimes, but when Cooper only mocks him and tears up the letter Sawyer had written for "Mr. Sawyer", Sawyer snaps and strangles the unarmed and shackled Cooper with his own chains. Although Sawyer was shaken by what he'd done, Cooper, who had destroyed many other lives apart from Sawyer's, definitely deserved his fate.
At the end of Season 3, Sawyer shoots an unarmed and surrendering Tom, reminding him that Tom had kidnapped Walt from the raft.
Perma-Stubble: He never grows more than a five o'clock shadow on the Island and very rarely shaves it down cleanly.
Personal Hate Before Common Goals: As a Con Man, Sawyer has the reasons and skillset to make everyone on the Island like him and potentially become one of the most useful survivors of the crash. However, because he instead chooses to be a massive Jerkass, everyone on the Island hates his guts, which causes a lot more problems for everyone than it solves.
Persona Non Grata: The Season 1 finale reveals the reason for him being on the plane. He was arrested after headbutting an Australian government minister in a bar and was deported along with being banned from ever setting foot in Australia again.
Pet the Dog: Even pre-Character Development, Sawyer had a few moments of sincere good intent:
Abandoning a con rather than risk traumatizing a young child.
Setting aside a trust fund for his daughter Clementine despite refusing to admit to being her father when Cassidy told him about her.
Trying to euthanize the suffering Mars when it was clear that Jack wasn't willing to do so.
Intervening, along with Sayid, when Jin attacks Michael.
He helps Aaron sleep when he realizes he likes the sound of his voice by reading old car magazines to him.
When he thinks he and Jack are parting for the last time, he tells Jack of his encounter with Christian in Australia and passes on the message that Christian couldn't: that he's proud of Jack in spite of their relationship degrading and that he loves him even though he turned Christian in. It brings Jack to tears.
Playing Both Sides: In Season 6, with the Man in Black and Charles Widmore.
Politically Incorrect Hero: While he plays up some racist attitudes early on as part of his desire to be hated, time reveals Sawyer to be a downplayed version of this trope; he doesn't seem to actually be racist, but some of the nicknames he uses are racially or culturally based, he makes some mildly racist jokes, and he initially assumes that Miles (who is Chinese-American) can translate for Jin (who is Korean), as well as frequently mocking Hurley's weight and (in one particularly cruel moment) making fun of his concerns about his mental health. Character Development helps ease this quality of Sawyer's; his politically incorrect humor slowly dies out as he gets closer to the other survivors, and by the final season, it's gone entirely.
Pop-Cultured Badass: Half of his nicknames come from pop culture.
Rage Breaking Point: Sawyer is clearly boiling with rage when he finally confronts Anthony Cooper, but he manages to restrain himself... until Cooper rips up the letter that a young James wrote to "Mr. Sawyer". Snapping entirely, Sawyer violently strangles Cooper with his chains, snarling at him to go to hell.
Revenge: Seeks it against "Mr. Sawyer". Thanks to Locke, Sawyer discovers that Anthony Cooper is the man he seeks, and Sawyer soon takes his long-awaited revenge.
The Rival: Sawyer and Jack spend most of their time butting heads over various things (Sawyer's behaviour, Jack's authority, Kate's affections, Jack's return to the Island endangering Sawyer and Juliet's new life), culminating in a brutal fistfight in the Season 5 finale. They don't truly bury the hatchet until Jack's about to die, but they greet each other warmly in the afterlife.
Significant Name Shift: After spending the first three seasons addressed almost exclusively by his alias, Sawyer is increasingly addressed as "James" by the other characters after he's killed Anthony Cooper, symbolically showing the end of his self-hatred and his rejection of the con man he became to avenge his parents. It's very telling that in the flash-sideways, he never adopted the name to begin with.
Southern-Fried Genius: Some people assume he's an 'idiot redneck', but Sawyer is a highly observant, well-read and intelligent man.
Took a Level in Kindness: Starting in Season 3. Hurley cons him into being nice to people, and the lesson sticks. Mostly.
What You Are in the Dark: In the Season 3 finale, Sawyer guns down a surrendering Tom Friendly, growling "that's for taking the kid off the raft". When Hurley asks why he did it, Sawyer claims that he just didn't believe Tom's surrender.
Why Am I Ticking?: Subverted. During his captivity with the Others in Season 3, Sawyer wakes up after having been sedated and is being told that a pacemaker – which is set to kill him if his heart frequency reaches a critical level or will be activated remotely by the Others if he tells Kate anything about the surgery – has been surgically implanted into his heart. At the end of the episode Ben Linus reveals to him that the surgery never happened as it was merely a con to demonstrate the Others' superior position.
Wild Card:
As of Season 6, he refuses to openly work with Widmore, Ilana, or the Man in Black, preferring instead to strike out on his own and just focus on escaping. Widmore eventually forces him to work for him by essentially kidnapping him at gunpoint, but after the submarine explosion, he ends up back with his old friends and aids them against the Man in Black until the finale.
He was also openly this in Season 1.
Sawyer: You're still back in civilization.
Jack: And where are you?
Sawyer: Me? I'm in the wild.
You Are What You Hate: After conning a woman and her husband in order to get out of a tight spot, a young James Ford started calling himself "Sawyer", acknowledging that he'd become like the man who destroyed his family.