Accidental Murder: The victim of a particularly senseless case; following an apparition of Walt, Shannon charges through the jungle amidst heavy rain, spooking an already shaken Ana Lucia, who shoots her dead on reflex.
Alpha Bitch: If the island was high school, there's no doubt Shannon would be the head of the popular clique.
Asthma Peril: She suffers an asthma attack in "Confidence Man". Boone explains that she doesn't like people knowing she has the condition due to the Nerdy Inhaler stereotype and made him carry her refills in his bag, which he hasn't been able to find since the crash. Her anxiety over not having her medication makes the attack even worse. Sun comes up with an alternative remedy: a paste made from eucalyptus leaves that she found in the jungle.
Aw, Look! They Really Do Love Each Other: Shannon may manipulate and snark at Boone, but when push comes to shove, she does show that she cares about him, being worried when he and Locke don't return from the search for Ethan before dark, and being devastated by Boone's death.
Back for the Finale: Like everyone else.
Beneath the Mask: Beneath her bad attitude and selfishness, Shannon is insecure, undervalues herself, and comes to resent her own feelings of uselessness.
Character Development: Shannon gradually moves past her selfishness and self-imposed isolation to become a more valued member of the survivors.
Cryptic Background Reference: In "Hearts and Minds", Boone mentions that Shannon was married at one point; Shannon's only centric episode focuses on a different part of her past, and her brief marriage is never brought up again.
Deadpan Snarker: Particular with regard to Boone, who she engages in Snark-to-Snark Combat from time to time.
Shannon: What's a four letter word for I don't care?
A Death in the Limelight: Her centric episode had a lot of people pitying her, when finally her goals and motivations were put into the spotlight instead of Boone's and rendering her a truly sympathetic character. Then Ana Lucia kills her.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Due to Sayid's actions.
Fatal Flaw: Her lack of belief in herself, which she manages to overcome with help from Sayid.
Flirty Stepsiblings: With Boone, to the point where they have a one night stand with each other. It's pretty clear initially, to the point where Claire mistakes them for lovers at first.
Claire: Is that your boyfriend?
Shannon: My brother, Boone. God's freakin' gift to humanity.
Heroic BSoD: Shannon is a wreck after Boone's death, not saying a word to anyone for some time or speaking at Boone's funeral, and after her misguided attempt to kill Locke, she remains withdrawn until Walt entrusts her with Vincent.
Hidden Depths: She appears to be just a shallow, manipulative Alpha Bitch, but she's much smarter than she lets on. She also speaks French, has a wonderful singing voice, and was a talented dance teacher.
It's All About Me: She tends to concern herself with her own problems first, resulting in everything else being secondary. As time goes on, however, Shannon starts growing out of this, becoming more willing to contribute to the group and even adopting Vincent for a time after Walt leaves on the raft.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Shannon may give off the impression of an Alpha Bitch, but she does try and do the right thing when it comes down to it. She isn't entirely selfish, she just has a very low opinion of her abilities. The reality is that people have been underestimating her for her entire life, her stepmother was a true bitch who clearly hated her, and she dealt with the unwanted romantic affections of her own stepbrother. She believed that everyone abandoned her.
Leg Focus: Sawyer nicknames her "Sticks" in reference to her long legs.
The Load: What everyone else (particularly Boone) accuse her of being. Boone thinks that she's lazy and useless, and she tries to prove otherwise. Shannon grows to resent her status as this with time; after losing track of Vincent, whom Walt had entrusted to her care before leaving on the raft, Shannon bitterly laments that she's failing at the one of the few things anyone had actually asked of her.
Manipulative Bitch: Although Boone did eventually wise up to her game, Shannon had been manipulating him for a long time. She does the same thing to Charlie.
Ms. Fanservice: Hence all the bikini shots.
Not Blood Siblings: With Boone.
Pet the Dog: Despite her usual Alpha Bitch personality, Shannon's flashbacks in "Abandoned" show that she was a caring and attentive dance teacher, complimenting her students on their form and helping them improve.
Pretty Freeloader: She starts to get resentful of her status of this as time goes on, though.
Screaming Woman: The pilot episode introduces her screaming her lungs out, but considering she's standing in the middle of the plane wreckage her reaction is understandable.
Screw the Rules, I'm Beautiful!: Shannon uses her beauty to get by in life and on the island, manipulating Charlie into catching fish for her.
Second Love: For Sayid.
Shannon: I am so not moving to the rape caves!
Took a Level in Kindness: She starts to shed her selfish attitude as the first season progresses, growing a lot through her relationship with Sayid and desire to actually contribute.
Wicked Stepmother: Has one in the form of Sabrina Carlyle.