Beware the Nice Ones: Starting in Season 3 when her ruthless streak gradually surfaces.
Borrowed Catchphrase: After saying she'd not harm Ben she knocks him out with an oar and is challenged about it.
"I lied."
Break the Cutie: You see it happen when she thinks Jin dies in the freighter explosion.
But I Can't Be Pregnant!: The Island sort of kills pregnant women, but that's not what she's worried about: she fears that she's pregnant with the child of the man who taught her English and with whom she had an affair just prior to crashing on the Island. She's not.
Calling the Old Man Out: In a scene reeking of satisfaction and badassery, she finally calls out her ruthless father on how he's hurt Jin.
Mr. Paik: Who do you think you are? I am your father. You will respect me!
Sun: Oceanic paid us our settlement for the crash. It was very significant. This morning, I bought a controlling interest in your company. So you will now respect me.
Mr. Paik: Why... would you do this?
Sun: You ruined my husband's life. It is because of you we were on that plane. Two people are responsible for his death. You are one of them. I am going to have my baby. And then we shall discuss the plans for the future of the company. Our company.
Character Death: Drowns in the submarine with Jin.
Consummate Liar: The episode "The Glass Ballerina" showcases this side of her personality, where it is revealed that she cheated on Jin (and she even lied to him later on the island when she found out she was pregnant and swore to him she hadn't been with any other man) and that even as a child she would lie to avoid facing consequences for her acts (blaming a maid for breaking the titular glass ballerina and getting her fired).
Deadpan Snarker: She has her moments.
Determinator: Like Jin, her will is strong.
Fatal Flaw: Insecurity, as well as the fact that she finds herself unable to communicate her feelings or express herself to others.
Irony:
Claire asks Sun to mind Aaron while she finds a vaccine for him. She agrees but tells her, "A mother should never leave her child". Later, Sun abandons her daughter Ji Yeon to return to the Island. As a result, the child becomes an orphan.
Sun is also pregnant with Ji Yeon during this moment, which she learns in the next episode.
Language Fluency Reveal: In "House of the Rising Sun", she reveals to Michael that she's fluent in English so she can explain why Jin attacked him earlier that day. Kate works it out when she sees Sun smiling at a joke she made and promises to keep the secret. She finally admits to the entire group, including Jin, that she speaks English in "...in Translation".
Love at First Sight: "...And Found" certainly leaves the viewer with the impression that this is the case, what with her and Jin bumping into each other, doing a double take, and smiling.
Mafia Princess: Her father, Woo-Jung Paik, is not a man to cross.
Mama's Baby, Papa's Maybe: When Sun realizes that she's pregnant, she initially believes that Jae Lee is the father, as Jin was believed to be infertile before coming to the Island. Juliet later informs her that the Island could have cured Jin's infertility and, with her help, Sun learns that Jin is the baby's father, much to Sun's joy.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Jin's mother threatened her that she would publicly dishonor Jin by leaking information that he is a Son of a Whore unless she received money. Sun asked her father for the money, but in exchange Jin would work directly under him. The audience knows that it was as Paik's enforcer, which caused the near deterioration of her marriage.
Obfuscating Stupidity: For years she pretended that she had no idea about her status as a Mafia Princess and that her father was a Corrupt Corporate Executive. She only broke the facade so that her father would help Jin. There's also Season 1 when she pretended that she didn't speak English.
Revenge Before Reason: She blames Ben for the destruction of the Freighter and Jin's apparent death, rather than Charles Widmore, the man who sent the Freighter in the first place. Sun even allies herself with Widmore in the hopes of killing Ben, though true to form, Ben manages to talk his way out of trouble.
Together in Death: With Jin.
Took a Level in Badass: Once her flash-forwards of being off the Island happened, it's clear losing Jin hardened her. To show that she was no longer a downtrodden daughter, she bought a controlling share in her father's company and told him that now he will respect her. She also conspires with Widmore to kill Ben. Basically, off-Island Sun is not someone to be messed with.