A Good Way to Die: Bert dies in awe and wonder watching the moon landing, and is mourned deeply by his coworkers. Don has the vision of Bert singing "The Best Things In Life Are Free" and actually gets teary-eyed.
Ambiguously Evil: He's willing to resort to blackmail and Roger (half-seriously) claims that Bert had his old doctor killed for performing an unnecessary surgery which cost Bert his balls.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Bert is obsessed with Japan and Ayn Rand. He's also an excellent businessman who's kept Sterling Cooper afloat since its founding and has the respect of just about everyone there.
Casting Gag: Robert Morse's first big role was in the 1961 film How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying, which as the title indicates, was set in the business world, not unlike Mad Men.
The Cast Showoff: Bert gets a musical number in "Waterloo", giving Robert Morse a chance to show off his pipes.
Cloudcuckoolander: He certainly acts like one, although he has demonstrated an uncanny talent for being cleverer than his fellows give him credit for.
Cool Old Guy: Bert is well into his later years, having worked alongside Roger's father, and is still extremely sharp, charismatic and good at his work.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: As shown with his verbal smackdown of Pete in the season 1 finale, as well as Roger's theory that Bert had a doctor who gave him an unnecessary orchiectomy killed. He is also the only character to have gotten away with blackmailing Don, and Don never even tries to retaliate.
Dirty Old Man: He has a copy of the woodcut The Dream of the Fisherman's Wife on the wall of his office.
The Dreaded: Downplayed as he is popular and well-liked by his employees but everyone in the office knows not to get on his bad side by betraying him or going over his head. It's telling that Roger and Don, two strong-willing alpha male types who can command any room they're in effortlessly, cowtow to Bert's wishes without any resistance and Don never even tries to retaliate for Bert's blackmail.
Dying Moment of Awesome: While ecstatically watching humanity's first steps on the moon.
Eccentric Millionaire: Bert's strangeness is matched only by his wealth.
Establishing Character Moment: Two major ones in the first season. First, when Don and Roger try to fire Pete Campbell, Bert blocks them and explains how Pete's family is wealthy and connected so tarnishing the company's reputation with them by firing their golden boy would be a bad business move. The second time is at the end of the season when Pete brings him the truth about Don's past and Bert's Armor-Piercing Response: "Who cares?". Bert Cooper might come across as just an Eccentric Millionaire but he is actually an incredibly clever businessman who knows exactly how to maneuver his employees to keep everything afloat and to instill undying loyalty.
Foreign Culture Fetish: He has a fondness for Japonica. His office at SC was done at least partially in tatami and had shoji partitions. Also, the office is decked out in ukiyo-e prints, and he demanded that everyone who entered said office take off their shoes.
Go Out with a Smile: He dies smiling, in awe and wonder after watching the Apollo 11 landing.
Honor Before Reason: He votes against firing Don from the company in "Waterloo", but when Roger talks with him later, Bert admits that Don is more of a liability now than anything. When Roger asks why he didn't join Cutler in voting Don out, Bert says that he has to be loyal to a member of his team.
Obfuscating Stupidity: To outsiders, Bert might appear to be a doddering old man that really ought to have retired long ago and is mainly kept around out of sentimentality. Those who underestimate him learn the hard way just how clever and capable he is.
Out of Focus: In Season 4. He had already entered a state of semi-retirement at the end of Season 2 and he doesn't even have an office in SCDP's building (he hangs out in the lobby instead). His role in Season 4 mostly consists of making snarky comments to passersby. Lampshaded and subverted in Season 5's "Far Away Places", where Don is stunned when he learns that Bert has become involved in SCDP business once more.
Pet the Dog: As amoral as he is, he still is outraged when he learns that Pete tried to get Joan to engage in prostitution. Even after he and the other partners vote that it's okay if Joan's okay with it, he tells Pete that if Joan changes her mind, he can't force her to do it.
Satanic Archetype: Bert isn't literally the Devil, but his Satanic appearance isn't by accident. Nor is it by accident that it is Cooper who blackmails Don into signing his contract.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!: When Don denounces tobacco in a full-page ad, an outraged Bert leaves the company. He comes back almost immediately, though.
Spirit Advisor: After Bert dies, Don has hallucinations where Bert's spirit gives him advice.
We Used to Be Friends: His relationship with Don becomes increasingly strained as the series progresses. Initially, Don looks up to Bert as a Mentor Archetype. Likewise, Bert values Don as the agency's ace-in-the-hole, often treating him as a protege of sorts. This changes as Don's behavior becomes more destructive and Bert begins to view him as a liability. By the time of Bert's death, he is openly opposed to Don working for the company, referring to him as a "pain in the ass", and only holding off on backing Jim's attempts to fire Don and seize his shareholding in the business on the grounds that Jim had exceeded his authority by trying to do so without consulting the other partners.
Worthy Opponent: He admits that, while Jim Cutler is not "on [his] team", he has vision and leadership skills that Roger lacks.