'50s Hair: The beginning of the series sees her with a slightly modified look reminiscent of Grace Kelly, one that she maintains well into the mid 1960s with slight deviations that resemble Jackie Kennedy.
'60s Hair: Her hair looks more Jackie Kennedy-esque well into the show, until her weight loss gave her a Pat Nixon like helmet. She even models a Beehive Hairdo in Rome (set in 1963).
'70s Hair: Towards the end of the series, her hair is more helmet-like with a bold swoop, that resembles the look of real-life political wives Pat Nixon, Betty Ford, Ladybird Johnson, and Martha Mitchell.
Abusive Parents: We learn through her therapy sessions that her mom was emotionally abusive and highly critical (for example, Betty was chubby as a child and her mother told her that because of this she wouldn't be able to find a husband) - she becomes defensive when her doctor points out that she has a lot of anger towards her mother. Later, feeling beleaguered by her own children, she displays some abusive tendencies herself, especially in the immediate wake of the divorce.
All Girls Like Ponies: Is frequently seen riding in Season 2 as a means of staving off her depression.
Amicable Exes: Makes great strides towards this with Don by the end of the sixth season. This leads to them having a one night stand that neither seems to regret very much.
Beauty Is Never Tarnished: Played completely straight when she's diagnosed with terminal lung cancer in the penultimate episode. Although she looks a little weaker, she's still very beautiful. Her vanity is partly why she refuses treatment.
Big Beautiful Woman: In Season 5, she has gained a significant amount of weight. This is alluded to when Henry tells her he doesn't care about if she's big or not, she snaps that it's because his mother is obese. By Season 6, she has lost most of the weight, along with letting go of her bitterness towards Don.
Brainless Beauty: Appearance means everything to her. A firm believer of Men Are Strong, Women Are Pretty. She isn't a Dumb Blonde though, given she graduated from Bryn Mawr in with a Bachelors in Anthropology, speaks Italian, and can be pretty cunning; it's just she was raised to be a Trophy Wife rather than an intellectual woman.
Break the Cutie: Seasons 1 and 2 showed her absolutely miserable and crawling up the walls living with Don and his pile of lies, secrets, and infidelities. To top it all off, she gets diagnosed with lung cancer in season 7b.
Broken Bird: The mean variety after her marriage to Don crumbles.
Celebrity Resemblance: Is said to look like Grace Kelly (and briefly gets a modeling gig (partially) because of it). This is in fact an Invoked Trope: The show's stylists intentionally modeled Betty's general look on Kelly.
Cool Car: Starts off with a buttercup-yellow-and-white '57 Ford wagon, graduating to a black/fake wood '60 Mercury wagon before inheriting her father's '61 Lincoln Continental which is a Cool Car for a suburban mother of three in the context of the '60s, not just something that has more style than, say, a Honda CR-V but had the same image as one in its day.
Face Death with Dignity: Why she refuses to get treatment when she's diagnosed with terminal lung cancer. She says she knows her time is over and doesn't want her children watching her rotting slowly as it happened to her mother, and she's extremely poised about it.
Foot-Dragging Divorcee: It takes her a while to divorce Don, but it's justified in that 1. It was scandalous 2. It took her a while to know he was cheating on her 3. She has to deal with a senile father and a unplanned pregnancy on top of it. But after JFK gets shot and she finds love in the arms of Henry, she really serves Don the papers.
Foolish Husband, Responsible Wife: Played with when she was married to Don, where she was the child and he was the adult, but he'd cheat on her; averted in her marriage to Henry.
Formerly Fit: Before her weight gain, she was a former model with a slim and delicate figure.
Formerly Fat: Two times this happened to her. She was chubby as a child (and given a hard time of it by her Mom) until her 13th summer. Then later, after she marries Henry and Don is engaged to Megan, she puts on a significant amount of weight to cause her former-model self angst. She then loses the weight.
Good Girls Avoid Abortion: Discusses the possibility with her doctor and a friend, but ultimately keeps the baby.
Hidden Depths: She's actually an extremely intelligent and educated woman, with a bachelors in Anthropology and fluent in Italian. Her tragedy is that her repressed and sexist upbringing have locked her in a decorative role, never fulfilling her potential.
Housewife: The show spends three seasons deconstructing this trope, as we see seemingly stereotypical 50s housewife Betty dealing with sexual frustration, her husband's infidelity, and boredom. And it doesn't stop with her marriage to Henry: frustration, weight gain, Henry entering politics, her inability to be truly tender with her kids, and Henry states he'd prefer her not to speak her mind about politics at dinners.
Hunting Is Evil: Betty is bothered by the birds in her garden, however, it's only after she loses her chance at modeling again thanks to Don, and realizes that she is still trapped in an unfulfiling and unhappy family and marriage that she takes a gun out to the garden and calmly shoots them.
Hypocrite: Her slut-shaming of other women marks her as this as she actually slept with a target's (Megan) husband (and her own ex-husband to boot), she has seen at least a couple men towards the end of her marriage to Don, and she has taken a few whirls in dressing seductively and enjoyed the attention from other men she isn't married to.
Ice Queen: And she's not defrosting any time soon. Sometimes combined with Drama Queen. She's that insecure and voluble.
It's All About Me: One of Betty's biggest flaws: she's a narcissist and a control freak, and her sense of self-worth revolves around having total control of everyone around her and having her life follow her definition of perfection. When she has an opinion, she expects people to agree with her, and when anything goes against the way she wants it, she snaps.
Joisey: But not the way we usually think of it. Born in Cape May, a tony resort community where her family summered. Grew up in Lower Merion Township, on the Main Line in Pennsylvania.
Law of Inverse Fertility: Discovers she's pregnant at the end of Season 2 right when she and her husband are on the verge of becoming permanently estranged. (It's also in contrast to Pete and Trudy, who really want a baby and aren't conceiving, while Betty is so desperate she's even considering abortion.)
Mama Bear: After her neighbor threatens to kill Sally's dog, she takes pot-shots at his pigeons.
My Beloved Smother: Betty's mom seems to be mostly responsible for Betty's huge complex about physical appearances.
Model Couple:
Makes one with Don, her dark haired, equally gorgeous (ex)husband. It has been commented on in show just how picture perfect a couple they are.
Roger: I remember Mona said they looked like they were on our wedding cake.
She also makes one with Henry, as the youthful looking and glamorous Trophy Wife to Henry's Silver Fox. Sally even comments that they make it a thing about how perfect they look together.
Nightmare Fetishist: Partially a sign of the times, partially a sign of how she's messed-up, but she has a wildly inappropriate sense of flirtatious humor, where she casually jokes about helping her husband rape a teenage girl in the other room.
Obnoxious Entitled Housewife: A sympathetic version of this trope as it showcases the depression and ennui she feels with the prescribed gender roles and her miserable marriage but as the series goes on, she goes from Innocently Insensitive when talking to Carla about Civil Rights to out-and-about narrow minded and petty when it comes to other women who have careers or are more sexual. She is also a dramatic, narcissistic Stepford Smiler who frets over being beautiful and slim and over how other people percieve Sally's femininity and has no outlet for her intelligence.
Stacy's Mom: She's extremely beautiful and youthful even in her late thirties (but she is 28 in Season 1). That is, her daughter's friend Glen has a crush on her, instead of crushing teenage Sally.
Stepford Smiler: While married to Don, who was manipulative and completely emotionally shut off from her. After remarrying, she thought she'd escape this, but found herself just as unhappy about her life, only now she doesn't have Don to blame for it, and spends most of season 5 passing the day eating in her mausoleum of a home to ignore her disappointment.
This starts to change in late season 5 when Betty realizes that Sally will still run to her in a crisis. By season 6, she seems to be letting go of her anger and has made peace with Don.
The Topic of Cancer: Discovers she has lung cancer after breaking a rib in season 7b.
Took a Level in Badass: The first three seasons were Betty trying to find the courage to stand her ground against Don. The fourth and fifth are her being essentially driven over the edge from this. The sixth is Betty beginning to reign the anger in. The 7th season has Betty, more or less, examining the role she was raised for and then she starts taking classes in psychology.
Took a Level in Jerkass: At the start of the series, her frustration and loneliness from her marriage to Don is easily sympathetic, but after her divorce and getting seemingly everything she has ever wanted, she goes on a pretty ugly downward spiral. Her anger at Don grows into spiteful bitterness, which she lashes out on Sally and anyone else in the house siding against her. Eventually, this takes a physical toll on her appearance in the fifth season.
Took a Level in Kindness: By the sixth season, she starts letting go of her anger (and the excess weight) and becomes happier than she has been in years.
Troubled Abuser: She's capable of a lot of cruelty and pettiness, especially towards her kids, but she had Abusive Parents herself (mother insulting her all the time, talks about fearing her father like it's normal), Don had a tendency to gaslight her in their marriage, and she's a Broken Bird with no outlet for her intelligence.
Weight Woe: Gained a significant amount of weight in Season 5. Don't expect breakfast-skipping, former model Betty to be taking it well. By late season 6, with the announcement that Henry is running for state senate, she gets herself back to her Draper level weight.
"Well Done, Daughter!" Gal: She and Sally clash over her wanting the girl to be perfect and over politics. After learning she's going to die in less than a year, she gives Sally a set of instructions for the burial and leaves her with these heartfelt words.
Betty: Sally, I always worried about you, because you marched to the beat of your own drum, but now I know that's good. I know your life will be an adventure. I love you, Mom.
White Anglo-Saxon Protestant: Technically, she's of German descent. Hofstadt isn't really a WASP-y name, and her father's (very Philly) accent and general aspect implies that he is a self-made man who rose up from humbler urban roots. But her upbringing and milieu (Philadelphia Main Line, Bryn Mawr, the fashion industry, Westchester County) is the very definition of WASP. So culturally, if not ethnically.
Womanchild: Highly immature, as her daughter's shrink politely lampshades.
As much as she'd like to think she's been around the block, she has some very naive and childlike qualities, which make her a victim initially (she has to have it spelled out for her before she realizes that Don cheats on her and constantly lies, and she forms a weird friendship with a ten-year-old boy to cope with her loneliness) and eventually a victimizer (manifesting most significantly in the petty, spiteful way she acts with Sally). Her comments about her own childhood reveal that her mother raised her pretty much how she raises Sally, and her father's comparison of her to a housecat ("You're very important and you have little to do") sums up the kind of adult life she expected and was expected to have.
After divorcing Don (and the recent death of her father), she marries a man a generation older than she is. Crazily enough, this coincides with her finally beginning to grow up: for all Don's faults, he was willing to coddle and shelter Betty as she (supposedly) wanted. Henry, on the other hand, expects her to act like an adult, and calls her on some of her immature decisions. (For good or ill, he typically takes Don's side, respecting Betty's right to be frustrated while still calling out her Disproportionate Retribution.)
Woman Scorned: After her divorce from Don and remarrying to Henry, Betty's bitterness makes her go way out of her way to make Don's life miserable, including still living in the house Don pays for and using their kids against him. However, this actually makes HER more miserable than Don: Sally rebels against her and challenges her authority, and the feeling of lacking control over her supposed idyllic life starts breaking her emotionally and psychologically.
Your Days Are Numbered: In season 7b, she finds that she has lung cancer and less than a year to live.
Your Princess Is in Another Castle!: This is pretty much how she reacts when, after divorcing Don and marrying Henry Francis, she finds she's not suddenly in paradise with all her problems solved.