'50s Hair: He maintains a slick, pomaded look well into the early seventies, making him look like a suave dinosaur; one episode in the last season had him not able to groom his hair in his usual manner, which struck his more up-to-date colleagues as odd.
Abusive Parents:
Don's father was an abusive drunk, and his wife - who only took Don in because she wanted a child and her own had all been stillbirths - clearly never liked him, referring to him as a "whore child".
During a flashback in "The Crash", she is shown beating him with a wooden spoon for losing his virginity to a prostitute, an encounter which was itself sexual abuse.
The Alcoholic: In Season 4. His nurse neighbor and Allison both call him a drunk. Hits rock bottom in Season 6, even spending a night in jail. Things were a bit better after he initially met Megan, whom he would ask to keep track of how many drinks he's had... until he started just drinking excessively behind her back.
Alliterative Name: Both "Don" and "Draper" start with "D". Doesn't apply to his real name, Dick Whitman.
Anti-Hero: He's an asshole, a serial adulterer, and a horribly negligent parent with the occasional Pet the Dog moment that shows that he sometimes does have good intentions.
Artifact Alias: Betty Francis, Bert Cooper, Pete Campbell, and Megan Draper know that Don Draper's real name is Dick Whitman, yet they all call him Don.
The Atoner: He tries to become a better person in the Season 6 finale. It doesn't work.
Backstory: Don's past is regularly explored via flashbacks.
Badass Decay: Don mellows out and loses some of his mojo. Peggy references it in-universe in Season 5 premiere "A Little Kiss".
Peggy: I don't recognize that man. He's kind and he's patient... It concerns me.
The Barnum: Don is willing to make an ad for just about anything, if the price is right, though he treats consumers with somewhat more respect than normal for this trope.
Bastard Angst: Don experienced this, being the bastard son of a whore. When his biological father died, his stepmother made life miserable for him, spurring him to take over a dead man's identity and become the Manipulative Bastard he is in the show.
Been There, Shaped History: Word of God says he's responsible for the creation of this famous Coke ad from the early 70s.
Broken Ace: Top of the line in his profession, handsome, charismatic, a keen business acumen, combines a beautiful family with the life of a ladies' man, apparently a real winner. Underneath it all, he suffers from some serious Parental Issues and other mental problems which make him get no satisfaction.
Broken Pedestal: For Peggy, who eventually calls him a monster, and for Sally, when the girl gets a glimpse of the real Draper.
Brutal Honesty: He mostly bullshits his way through (a dual) life, and part of his executive / creative job consists of it in order to keep clients happy, but oddly enough, he manages to combine both Brutal Honesty and being a Consummate Liar; at work, he prefers not to sugarcoat the truth and likes to be as direct or blunt as possible, as exemplified by his sudden lambast against tobacco and his attack of sincerity during his Hershey's pitch.
Bumbling Dad: In the early seasons, he gives the overall impression of being well-meaning and loving, if clueless, which stands in sharp contrast to Betty's emotional and physical abuse of Sally. However, in the later seasons he downgrades into Parental Neglect.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: The best creative there is, he can skip important meetings or do eccentric things just because he's that good, but eventually the partners stop putting up with him.
Byronic Hero: Tall, Dark, and Handsome? Check! Charismatic and charming? Check! Passionate when putting his mind to something? Check! Has numerous flaws? Check! Dark and Troubled Past? He took someone else's identity to run away from it, so... Check!
Carpet of Virility: Don's manliness only gets reinforced during his Shirtless Scenes.
The Casanova: Wherever Don Draper goes, beautiful women hit on him and Don is perfectly willing to take them up on it, despite being married. He becomes something more of a Casanova Wannabe in the fourth season. Now that he's available and hitting on everything that moves, he gets turned down a lot more (though his conquests are still legendary). At least until he starts getting his act together in The Summer Man. As more of his past becomes revealed and particularly the parts that likely affected his current behavior, he turns into a Deconstruction of the trope. He's an exercise in just how screwed-up someone has to be to actually behave like he does.
Catchphrase: Don's "This never happened."
The Charmer: Don is immensely charming and charismatic and knows how to use it with his looks to win over clients and any woman he sets his sights on.
Chivalrous Pervert: In spite of his dickish tendencies, he has a problem with the other guys at the office being overtly crude and creepy around female employees. He sort of lampshades this tendency when he tells Peggy, "I have rules" about this kind of thing (meaning, particularly, hitting on/having relationships with women at work). His drunken seduction of Allison, his secretary in Season 4, unfortunately, undermined this — becoming a deliberate signal of just how out of control Don's life has become.
Consummate Liar: He mostly bullshits his way through (a dual) life, and part of his executive / creative job consists of it in order to keep clients happy, but oddly enough, he manages to combine both Brutal Honesty and being a Consummate Liar; at work, he prefers not to sugarcoat the truth and likes to be as direct or blunt as possible, as exemplified by his sudden lambast against tobacco and his attack of sincerity during his Hershey's pitch.
Control Freak: His relationship with Sylvia eventually turns into him demanding she do various demeaning things. This causes her to break up with him.
Cool Car: In order: 1959 Oldsmobile Dynamic 88 sedan, 1960 Buick LeSabre convertible, 1961 Dodge Polara, 1962 Cadillac Coupe De Ville, 1965 Cadillac Coupe De Ville.
Deadpan Snarker: He likes to make fun of the more absurd things he sees.
Dead Person Impersonation: While serving in the Korean War, he accidentally caused a gas explosion that killed his commanding officer and wounded him. He switched their dog tags, used Don Draper's identity to desert, and pretended to be him to get away from his family and start his own life.
Death by Childbirth: His mother was a young prostitute who died giving birth to him.
Did Not Get the Girl: Despite all his charisma and magnetism with the ladies. Don finishes the series twice divorced and firmly separated from all his romantic pairings.
Disco Dan: As the series goes on, it's clear that Don's still stuck in the '50s. It's especially evident in the trailer to Season 7B, where he still has the '50s look going into the '70s.
Disneyland Dad: After divorcing Betty, Don goes long stretches without seeing his kids. When he does pick them up for visitation, he takes them to flashy places, including once to Disneyland.
Domestic Abuse: While the time period prevents the show from directly acknowledging it, in the past Don has threatened to harm Betty (even implied killing her), called her a whore, gaslighted her, on top of the myriad of lies and adultery.
Doorstop Baby: How he arrived at his biological father's house.
Double Standard: Rape, Female on Male: Played for Drama. One of young Dick Witman's formative experiences is being subjected to this. A prostitute named Aimee, who nursed him back to health while he was sick with a severe fever, suddenly starts forcing herself on him while he is still bedridden from his illness, and Dick, despite clearly being uncomfortable and scared with the situation and even saying "no" at first, is both too physically weak and frozen with fear to fight her off and reluctantly gives in. When Aimee later lets it slip in front of Abigail that she "took that boy's cherry", she immediately assumes that it was all Dick's own fault somehow and proceeds to beat him relentlessly with a wooden spoon while she angrily screams that he is "filthy" and "disgusting". Needless to say, this event is clearly portrayed as one of the main moments in forming some of Don's more unhealthy views on sex.
The example arguably extended to the real world, as pointed out by Abigail Rines in The Atlantic; Aimee's rape of Don didn't get as much public notice (much less extensive debate) as other then-current fictional rapes, being largely glossed over in most contemporary reviews and analyses of the episode or, when it was mentioned, treated as if he actually wanted it.
Earn Your Happy Ending: After a whole lot of soul-searching and a decade's worth of self-loathing and character development, Dick Whitman/Donald Draper self-actualizes on a hippie commune, ending the series seemingly at peace with himself.
Expository Hairstyle Change: It's not as noticeable as the other characters' style evolutions, but Don grows some slight sideburns in the second half of the last season, signifying his change with the times.
Expy: A wealthy self-made man who grew up poor, adopted a new name to escape his past and gives off the impression of charm and charisma to cover how broken and unhappy he is, Don is basically a twenty-first century version of Jay Gatsby.
A Father to His Men: A very distant, cold, 1960s-style father, but a father none-the-less.
Flat "What": Don does these. A lot.
Foot-Dragging Divorcee: He tries to talk Betty out of a divorce and she holds firm, eventually after finding out about her and Henry he threatened to cut Betty off financially and from the kids, but then relenting and splitting more amicably with Betty.
Freudian Excuse:
His backstory flashbacks often account for his twisted personality in the present day. Hell, even his very name, Dick Whitman, has a Freudian origin; his mother's greatest wish was to cut off his father's dick and boil it in hog fat for getting her pregnant. His mother-figures were also traumatically terrible.
It is strongly implied that the main reason why Don acts like such a Control Freak towards the women he is in a relationship with, is because he was sexually assaulted by an older woman as a teenager.
Friendly Enemies: His general relationship with Pete. Half of the time, they're at each other's throats. The other half, they show a genuine respect for each other and share a drink when discussing the issues of their personal lives.
Guile Hero: Although he borders on Villain Protagonist a lot of the time, Don's great ability is his capacity to talk his way out of everything, which is best demonstrated by his advertising presentations.
Has a Type: Don begins the show married to a blonde Stepford Smiler, but all of his mistresses/lovers have been rather independent-minded and outspoken, and all have been brunette except for redhead Bobbie Barrett (who pursued him, rather than the other way around), and blonde Faye Miller (whom he dated after his divorce).
Heroic Bastard: Although calling him "heroic" is a stretch, he is the protagonist and he has been struggling with being a bastard to his mother who died.
Hunk: Suave, manly, and sharply dressed.
Hypocrite:
He is a serial adulterer, but is absolutely cruel to Betty and then Megan when he believes them to be promiscuous.
When Don learns that Sal is gay, Don lectures Sal about how it's important to be faithful to one's wife. Don was cheating on Betty shortly before he learned about Sal's sexuality.
In the season 3 finale, Don masterminds the creation of Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce to avoid being absorbed by McCann. Later in season 7, when Jim Cutler is trying to force Don out of the company, he convinces the other partners that it would now be for the best to sell out to McCann.
Ignored Epiphany:
For Christ's sake, Don, how many times do you have to realize you love and value your wife before it's enough to make you not go right out and sleep with another woman? It's enough to make her want to divorce you.
Don, how many times does your Martin Guerre past have to be dragged out of you and how many anxiety attacks do you have to have because of it before you take Faye's advice and do something about it legally?
Indy Ploy: Despite demanding a solid planification from his underlings, Don relies too much on his own talent, inspiration, improvisation, audacity, or plain luck, a thing that doesn't sit well with his partners.
Campbell: Don't act like you had a plan. You are Tarzan, swinging from vine to vine!
Informed Attractiveness: Women on the show frequently mention how handsome he is. In season five, when he jokes that it will look like he struck out when he leaves Joan in a bar, she scoffs at the idea that anyone would believe that.
I Just Want to Be Loved: Deep down, Don wants to be appreciated for who he is regardless of what name he's using. His platonic relationship with Anna is his most gratifying and wholesome in the entire show: even though she's the first to find out about his past and has every right to scrutinize him for it, she decides to support and respect him. Don reciprocates and spends most of his vacations in California with her - some of the few moments in the show where he's truly at peace.
It's All About Me: The other partners or workers call him out arguing this whenever he does something impulsive or unexpected (which happens a lot). Most of his peculiar behavior is the way he has to cope around his own issues.
Knight Templar Big Brother: Tragically averted. When Don's (Dick's) little brother shows up looking for help, Don shows him the door and his little brother ends up committing suicide. Don does at least keep the shoebox full of keepsakes his brother left him, which Betty finds and uses as part of her reason to divorce him.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He tends to be blunt or distant and his chronic infidelity alone makes him a dick. He can also be quite personable, charming, and fair and often tries to be a decent human being and father, but his character flaws often work against his good intentions.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Pulls some strings to provide a deferment to the Rossen boy, only to regain a place between the legs of Sylvia, the boy's mother.
Ladykiller in Love: Season 5, when he settles down with Megan.
Like Parent, Like Spouse: As Megan puts it, "My father has Marx, you have the bottle."
Madonna-Whore Complex: This seems to be Don's worldview. He seeks prim and proper women, like Betty, to settle down with, but constantly engages in extramarital affairs with sexually aggressive women. This is most obvious with Don's third wife, Megan. Don marries her after seeing how good she is with his kids, but is extremely upset when she displays any hints of sexuality outside of his control, such as singing a sexy French song at Don's 40th birthday party or when she does a kissing scene for her role on a TV Soap Opera. It is later heavily implied that his whole complex is a result of the trauma he expierienced from having being raped by Amiee as a teenager, with Amiee also having briefly acted as the first (and quite possibly only) positive maternal figure in his life before she forced herself upon him.
Manipulative Bastard: Don's a master of office politics. To say nothing of his emotional abuse of Betty.
Married to the Job: Don's character arc in the final season has him suffering an emotional breakdown due to the failings of his second marriage and the company's absorption into McCann. After finally coming to terms with all of his shortcomings, Don realizes the one thing he's really good at and enjoys doing is being an advertiser.
Meaningful Name: Among other Freudian connotations explored below, "Dick" reflects his inability to keep it in his pants and his mean tendencies, while "Don" and "Draper" evoke his manly, mercantilistic, elegant, and dapperish parts.
Morality Pet: Anna is his. He's not entirely a bad guy, but Anna is the only person in his life he doesn't on occasion act like a dick towards. Tellingly, she's also for a long time the only person who really knows who he is.
The Movie Buff: Don is often seen going to the movies, sometimes to get ideas, other times just to be alone. He has occasionally taken other people with him - he goes with Lane to see a Japanese monster movie in Season 4, and in Season 6, he takes Bobby to see Planet of the Apes (1968).
Mr. Fanservice: Don probably has the most shirtless scenes of the male cast.
My God, What Have I Done?:
Don, after learning that his brother committed suicide shortly after Don bribed him into leaving him alone.
He has another moment at the end of "Commissions and Fees", when he learns that he drove Lane to suicide.
Mysterious Past: Most of the characters, including his children, know virtually nothing about his background. Don eventually reveals he's from Hershey, Pennsylvania, which is just barely far enough into Central PA to count as sort of Midwestern. It certainly isn't within the Philadelphia sphere of influence that would render it East Coast. When you add that he was born and spent his first ten years in rural Illinois—just outside Chicago—it's enough.
Harry: Draper? Who knows anything about that guy? No one’s ever lifted that rock. He could be Batman for all we know.
Narcissist: A textbook example. Throughout the series, he consistently prioritizes his own desires at others' expense and feels entitled to respect and adoration despite being largely incapable of reciprocating such feelings.
Never Gets Drunk: Don never did, until Season 4.
Odd Friendship:
Don mostly eschews from close male friendships, mostly out of fear that he will reveal something out of his past. But he does develop a rapport with Lane, whose British reserve means he never attempts to pry into Don's private life.
Don's best friend is Roger, because it is a mutually shallow relationship where they don't dig deep in each other's personal lives.
Office Romance: Poster boy and trope image for Sleeping with the Boss. He's initially against this kind of relationship on principle (primarily for practical reasons, but he also has some ethical qualms about it).
In the first episode, Peggy gets hired as Don's new secretary and tries to impress him and sleep with him, but he has none of it. He is married and sleeps around the town, but not with office ladies... at that point.
Don sleeps with his secretary Allison whe he's wasted and she helped him to get home. She feels exploited by him because he pretended like nothing happened.
Don starts dating Faye Miller. She is a marketing researcher hired by SCDP, and probably the healthiest of Don's post-divorce relationships, until he screws it up. They kept it secret from all people in the office.
Megan starts at SCDP as Don's new secretary, they sleep together and quickly Don decides to marry her, as he was infatuated with her model looks, magical nanny abilities and desire to work in advertising as a copy writer.
One of the Girls: For a macho man and serial womanizer, Don does not have many close friendships with men, (aside from an oftentimes hostile relationship with Roger), instead forming closer friendships with women like Anna, Peggy, and Joan.
Orphan's Ordeal: His being a bastard led to some hard times growing up.
Parental Abandonment: Don has abandoned his children on several occasions — his daughter Sally's birthday party where he just took off for several hours, missing the cake; his trip to California which lasted almost a month; and his blackout in Season 4, where he drank the whole weekend and forgot to come get his kids for their visit.
Parental Neglect. In the fourth season, following his divorce, he starts forgetting when he has to take his kids, going on a date and leaving them with a sitter, or missing his weekend with them because he was on a two-day bender. The fifth season opener shows the increasing distance with his promise to take the kids to the Statue of Liberty, to which Sally responds, "You always say that, but we never do."
Don: I don't think I ever wanted to be the man who loves children. But from the moment they're born, that baby comes out and you act proud and excited and hand out cigars but you don't feel anything. Especially if you had a difficult childhood. You want to love them, but you don't. And the fact that you're faking that feeling makes you wonder if your own father had the same problem. Then one day they get older, and you see them do something and you feel that feeling that you were pretending to have. And it feels like your heart is going to explode.
Pet the Dog: He has numerous moments throughout the series, mainly with his children and Anna, that show he's capable of genuine kindness and provide some insight into the kind of man Don could be if he weren't so extraordinarily fucked up.
Promiscuity After Rape: Don's first sexual experience was being raped by a prostitute who'd been taking care of him. As an adult, Don seems nearly incapable of monogamy generally have a flings while also having an affair while married.
The Quiet One: As admen go he is incredibly taciturn. This actually works to his advantage in meetings and campaign sessions, because what he does have to say comes off as that much more important.
Rags to Riches: He grew up on a farm during the Great Depression and is now a very wealthy man with a fancy apartment in Manhattan.
Rape as Backstory: As revealed in "The Crash" — a prostitute, Aimee, who had been caring for the sick adolescent Dick Whitman, molested him and took his virginity. This is implied to be a major contributing factor to his skewed perspectives on women and sex. Emphasized in season 6 when Megan and her friend Amy (who has the same name as Don's abuser) decide to have a threesome with Don. When Megan offers while she and Amy both kiss and caress Don, he seems to freeze up and says he doesn't really want to, but Megan grabs him by the genitals and calls him a liar, reminiscent of how he lost his virginity. The next day, they don't talk about it.
Really Gets Around: He has a reputation of sleeping around.
Redemption Failure: Don reverts to his philandering ways between seasons 5 and 6, cheating on Megan with a neighbor.
Reformed, but Rejected: Don makes a sincere effort to make things right with all the people he's wronged in the season 6 finale, but he has too many pieces to pick up and everything he does to help one person ends up hurting someone else, leaving him without both Megan and his job.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!: Don does this during meetings so often it could be considered a running gag of sorts.
Self-Made Man: A rural boy raised in a whorehouse becomes a successful executive and partner of a Midtown Manhattan company thanks to his hard work and talent after working as a salesman and attending City College at night.
Sex God: He's supposedly really good in bed, with Bobbie Barret confirming that his skills are remarkable.
Significant Wardrobe Shift: Don sticks to his late 50s/early 60s fashion for the majority of the show, but finally embraces the times in the final half of Season 7. His suits become more emblematic of the 1970s with wider lapels, bigger ties, and colored shirts.
Sink-or-Swim Mentor: To Peggy.
Son of a Whore: "You told me your mother died in childbirth. Mine did too. She was a prostitute. I don't know if my father paid her, but when she died, they brought me to him and his wife. And when I was ten years old, he died. He was a drunk, he got kicked in the face by a horse. She buried him and took up with some other man, and I was raised by those two sorry people."
Standard '50s Father: Taken apart at the seams. Him being married with kids is a First-Episode Twist after he's already established as a womanizer, and he understands clients a whole lot better than his family. In Season 4, Don makes the rather poignant admission that he's uncomfortable around his kids, but still misses them when they're not visiting.
The Stoic: Displays a stern and cold demeanor, even when he's being charming.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: When you hear this phrase, Don Draper is the image that pops into your head.
That Man Is Dead: The only time he acknowledges having been Dick Whitman is when Adam confronts him, and even then he does not directly confirm it. He does go by Dick when with Anna. Although his second wife, Megan, also knows his real name, and refers to him as it in "A Little Kiss."
Took a Level in Kindness: Briefly after his second marriage. "Good"-ol' Draper comes back before long.
Peggy: I don't recognize that man. He's kind and he's patient... It concerns me.
Trademark Favourite Food: Whisky note . Reflecting on his sober (as in solemn) and classic personality, Mr. Draper will have an Old Fashioned made with rye (usually Canadian Club, of which there's always a bottle in his office).
The Un-Favourite: His stepmother never liked him and was mean to him even before she had a son of her own.
Unfortunate Names: Dick is of course well known for its unfortunateness but add Whitman to the end and you easily come to Dick Whit. His name stems from his mother having died in childbirth and her last words were, "I'll cut his dick off."
Wouldn't Hurt a Child: Don is against the use of physical punishment in the raising of his kids, a very progressive attitude for his time. As he explains to Betty when questioned about this, his father used to beat him up all the time when he was a child, and all it led to was him bottling up a lot of anger towards him, to the point of regularly fantasizing about murdering him.
You're Not My Mother: He's not shown saying this directly to her, but he refuses to acknowledge Abigail as his mother, no doubt because she never treated him like a son either. In addition, when Adam is born, he refuses to acknowledge him as his brother (although Adam is never shown as being anything but nice towards him and clearly looks up to him).