'50s Hair: As he is a politician, he maintains this conservative look into 1970.
Mama's Boy: Implied, his mother is a very terrifying and domineering woman that looks down at Betty and he's more mild-mannered compared to her. He's shown to be in some denial after a heavier Betty dyes her hair black, resembling a younger version of his Mother.
May–December Romance: He's a good fifteen years older than Betty and while they aren't without problems, it's clear they love each other very much.
The Missus and the Ex: Having been through a divorce before, Henry tries to be the voice of reason with Betty to try to get along better with Don for the kids sake and her own future, but tends to be terse with Don every time they communicate in early years. By later seasons, he generally shrugs it off. The one real flash of anger toward Don featured Henry passive aggressively nudging his car forward into boxes of Don's stuff after an argument with Betty, and while requesting he move his items in a later conversation, requesting Don not come on Sunday because that is the day of Don's son Gene's birthday party. Don shows up anyway and Betty lets him because he'd not risk losing contact with the kids for the sake of the fight.
Not So Above It All: "The Runaways" has him display some chauvinistic attitudes towards Betty, with him even referring to both her and a teenage Sally as "Girls! Girls!"
Parental Substitute: Justified since he's more around than Don and has far less issues than him. Don gets a little jealous of his good parenting skills.
Parenting the Husband: Gender-flipped; he sometimes finds himself doing this with Betty (for example, defusing a row between her and Sally by shouting "Girls!"), due to a combination of their age gap and Betty's immaturity.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He might be the best parent on the show. In spite of this, Betty takes his advice about everything except when it comes to Sally.
Screw the Rules, I Have Connections!: Defied, he doesn't invoke his clout to dodge petty things like car tickets and doesn't like it when his relatives try to. He explains to his Mother that his approach to dealing with a speeding ticket is "to pay it".
Silver Fox: Quite a few housewives find him attractive, which does his political career no harm.