'50s Hair: This is especially noticeable in the first three seasons, looking parted and slick, like a model young executive.
'60s Hair: His slicked hair loses more grease and he models the popular "Dry Look" hairdos, even growing his hair out.
The Ace: He can dance and write, in addition to being a good salesman.
Actually Pretty Funny: In response to Roger's pirate crack when wearing the eye patch after being accidentally shot by a couple of GM executives, he says he'd laugh if he didn't hurt so much.
Almighty Janitor: Roger offers to promote Ken to partner in exchange for Ken getting his father-in-law to sign on as an account. Ken turns him down because he does not want to get involved with any of the office politics.
Always Someone Better: He's the target of envy from Pete, Harry, and Paul.
Because You Were Nice to Me: After taking a position at Dow Chemical, Ken gleefully makes Pete and Roger's lives miserable, but is quite friendly with Don. This is because, unlike Pete and Roger, Don was actually willing to go to bat for Ken to keep his job when he was fired, and took the time to empathize with Ken and try to help him when he was despairing over it.
Break the Cutie: The Chevy execs drive him crazy, involving him in a car crash and later shooting him on a hunting trip — enough to make him give the Chevy account to Pete.
Butt-Monkey: In Season 6, courtesy of some rowdy executives of General Motors. A car accident leaves him walking with a cane and shortly after he needs an eyepatch thanks to a hunting accident. Then he calls it quits and hands the account to Pete.
Character Development: Actually done rather subtly, but Ken's has steadily changed over the course of the series. In the early series, he was a bit of a Jerkass Womanizer who had no problem taking advantage of the office politics. However, he's shown a bit of a softer side when he starts honestly and vocally appreciating Peggy's creative work. After settling down and getting married, Ken mellowed out, becoming faithful to his wife and transitioned to being an all around nice guy. By latter seasons, Ken is the only member of the office able to balance his work and personal life.
Chivalrous Pervert: In the early seasons, he's every bit the womanizer that his peers are, but unlike them, Ken is never shown to be manipulative or condescending towards the women he's hitting on. He treats Peggy with respect and tries (unsuccessfully) to court Jane before he finally gets engaged and remains faithful to his wife.
Eyepatch of Power: His attempt to cover up his missing eye with an eyepatch does make Ken look more distinctive.
Eye Scream: He loses an eye to a hunting accident in Season 6.
Happily Married: To Alex Mack.
Hidden Depths:
For all his bluster and inappropriate behavior, he respects Peggy and treats her relatively equally much faster than any of the other characters in his generation. They later develop into a very effective team when going after clients.
It was already known that Ken had written and published one story, but Season 5 reveals he's published over 20 science fiction and fantasy stories under a pseudonym, something he's mildly embarrassed about but that both his wife and Peggy seem genuinely impressed by. When Roger finds out, he's less impressed, giving Ken a tongue lashing for dividing his focus.
Most Writers Are Writers: During season one, he fiddled around with getting some of his writings published, much to the jealous fury of Pete. When it turns out he's succeeding, it's Roger's turn to be jealous.
Nice Guy: Ken has a few obnoxious moments in early seasons, but eventually becomes the most decent, likable, and honest person in the office.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: In season 4, Ken quits his position at McCann when he's approached by the Partners to start working for SCDP. This ultimately comes back to bite him in Season 7 where after McCann buys out SC&P, McCann makes it his first priority to fire Ken for previously quitting. The real kicker is Roger doesn't even try to fight for his job.
Only Sane Employee: Ken is the only character whose work has never been affected by a secret personal life, blatant narcissism, excessive drinking, the inability to keep his pants on, spinelessness, or any of the other deep character flaws everyone else seems to have.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Peggy in Season 5.
Politically Incorrect Hero: In the first season, he spends a whole scene fat-shaming Peggy. His rather old school prejudice against the Irish is what gets him fired after the McCann-Erickson takeover. And that doesn't even stop him making more remarks.
The Reliable One: Throughout the early seasons, the senior staff actually favored Ken over Pete Campbell. He doesn't advance like others because of his refusal to get involved in any of the office politics. Illustrated when he isn't deemed essential enough to be worth being immediately brought to the newly-formed SCDP, but the partners do think enough of him to eventually hire him when the company is on a more stable financial footing.
Satellite Character: Ken seems to exist primarily to act as a foil for other characters. Paul Kinsey and Pete Campbell are jealous of Ken's literary ability, Sal Romano is attracted to him, and Ken's refusal to mix SCDP business with his personal life in Season 4 serves to contrast with most of the other account men at SCDP. Early in season 1, Ken was also a Charismatic Womanizer while Harry was a stiff who kowtowed to his wife. In later seasons, Ken is now Happily Married while Harry callously cheats on his wife.
Took a Level in Jerkass: In "Time Zones", the stress from managing virtually every account in SC&P's New York office has done a number on Ken's temper. Though these are mostly restricted to times when he is under extreme duress. He seems more apologetic to Joan for his irritability later, and he's genuinely pleased to see Don in "Field Trips". He specifically notes how much the carousel in Central Park reminds him of Don, serving as a heartwarming Call-Back to Don's speech way back in Season 1's "The Wheel" (which would've occurred almost a decade a go, in-universe).
Tranquil Fury: In Season 7's "Severance," in response to getting fired by Roger and McCann, Ken takes over his father-in-law's position at Dow Chemicals and then tells Roger and Pete calmly that they will be needing to please him now. After stringing them along for a few months, Ken gleefully fires them when doing so would kibosh SC&P's attempt to move to California and maintain autonomy from McCann.