Abusive Parents: His father STILL hits him. That is to say, clubs him to the ground and then tortures him for supposedly "abandoning" his family.
All Love Is Unrequited: He has an attraction to Joan that he harbors for a long time. When he finally makes a pass at her she quietly makes it clear she doesn't feel the same way.
Bait-and-Switch Tyrant: Initially comes off as a humorless buzzkill who PPL sent to babysit the managing partners of Sterling Cooper. He actually turns out to be a pretty good guy, until he embezzles funds from SCDP to fix his tax problems.
Berserk Button: When he finds out the guys' visit to a brothel scuttles a deal with Jaguar he helped negotiate, Lane goes ballistic, leading to...
Beware the Nice Ones: In "Signal 30", he responds to Pete's mockery by challenging him to a fist fight. Lane kicks his ass.
British Stuffiness: He only shows emotion when he's drunk and/or very upset.
Brits Love Tea: As befits his nationality, he's frequently seen with a cuppa.
Bungled Suicide: The Jaguars are indeed lemons.
Defrosting Ice King: He comes to enjoy America and get along well with Don as Season 3 and Season 4 roll on.
The Dog Bites Back: After being condescended to by his PPL bosses for most of Season 3 and then cast overboard when PPL decides to sell Sterling Cooper, he participates in the season-ending mutiny and helps found Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce.
Driven to Suicide: After battling with depression for a whole season, Lane kills himself after Don fires him for embezzlement.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: He's quite often the Hyper-Competent Sidekick, but feels and gets unappreciated almost as often.
Fatal Flaw: Pride, and his British Stiff Upper Lip. Much of what happens to Lane could be avoided if only he could ask for help from the others, which he doesn't.
Honour Before Reason: Lane's pride is his fatal flaw. He finds asking for financial help unbecoming, as it would speak badly of his managerial skills.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: To PPL as demonstrated in the Season 3 finale, when he demonstrates that he is more than capable of going out on his own, using what he's learned despite being massively unappreciated. He's also often this throughout Season 4, as he's much more on the "technician" side of Technician Versus Performer.
Immigrant Patriotism: Lane loves living in America and being a New Yorker. He makes an effort to pick up some American habits and decks out his office in New York-related tchotchkes — including a Mets pennant (the Mets, like Lane, were new in the Big Apple, having been established in 1962). That said, he's still a proud Brit, defending Jaguar and cheering England in the 1966 World Cup.
Intimidating Revenue Service: He owes the British government a large amount of money in back taxes, and he is so scared of Inland Revenue that he embezzles from the company to pay them back. According to his lawyer, the British tax authorities are going after him so harshly because he paid his US taxes before he paid his UK taxes.
Meaningful Name: Lane pays the price.
Mistaken for Gay: The reason the Jaguar executive doesn't invite him along with Roger, Pete, and Don to the brothel.
No Dead Body Poops: Averted according to Word of God. Joan noticeably wrinkles her nose when his body blocks his office door from opening.
Only Sane Man: Frequently clashes with Don and Roger over their more extravagant ideas and reminds them of their financial obligations.
Playboy Bunny: He dates one — a black one.
Quintessential British Gentleman: Deconstructed all over the place. While Lane does have many of these traits, he finds himself actually much more attracted to America and their forward-thinking ideals, which leads to him separating from his wife, being attacked by his father, and ultimately, his suicide.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He seems to have a more even temper than the rest of the partners. When Joan is in tears, thinking they're going to replace her at the opening of season five, he comforts her and tells her that they're barely holding together without her and can't wait for her to return. Don would have been stiff and uncomfortable in the presence of a crying woman and Roger would have tried to have sex with her.
Stealing from the Till: Lane Pryce owes the British government a large amount of money in back taxes and he is so scared of Inland Revenue that he embezzles from the company to pay them back. The British tax authorities are very harsh on Pryce because he paid his US taxes before he paid his UK taxes.
Stiff Upper Lip: A prime example, even in his suicide note: it's just a boilerplate resignation letter.
Took a Level in Badass: At the end of season 3. Goes from being PPL's little snitch/bitch to standing up to them and basically hijacking SCDP from under their noses and again in "Signal 30" when he beats down Pete for insulting him.
Unconfessed Unemployment: Lane doesn't tell his wife that he's been forced to resign from SCDP after Don catches him embezzling.
We Used to Be Friends: His relationship with Pete Campbell becomes strained over time. Initially, the two are on amicable terms with each other. By Season 5, however, the two are literally punching each other.
Lane: I can't believe the hours I've invested into helping you become the monster you've become.