'50s Hair: Starts off with a groomed look of the era, adds a goatee, and then ends up with no hair due to joining the Hare Krishnas.
Bourgeois Bohemian: Grows a beard to put on the facade that he's "with it" among the righteous youth.
Butt-Monkey: More and more as Peggy rises through the ranks.
Celebrity Resemblance: He indicates in Season 1 that Joan used to mock him for looking like Orson Welles. Come Season 2, he's embraced the resemblance somewhat, with the help of his new beard.
Deadpan Snarker: He has no problem making fun of things that annoy him.
Giftedly Bad: Fancies himself a talented writer. The show is constantly providing evidence to the contrary.
Compared to Peggy, his work as a copywriter is mediocre at best. Some episodes indicate that he has good ideas, but no follow-through.
His coworkers discover a play he has written and act it out. No one is impressed.
His return, after being Put on a Bus, reveals that he has been fired from a number of copywriter jobs at other agencies.
He presents Harry with a spec script he has written for a Star Trek episode. He is very proud of his work, calling it the best thing he has ever written. Harry, Peggy, and even Paul's girlfriend agree that it's terrible.
Harry: I think it was really hard for him.
Peggy: Then he shouldn't be doing it.
Green-Eyed Monster: He's jealous of Peggy's success (not that he does anything about it).
Hidden Depths: Was a talented a capella singer at Princeton, and sung in their choir. He also reveals in "The Christmas Waltz" that he's more sensitive than he appears and is really just desperate for approval and acceptance wherever he can get it.
Hipster: Of the period's definition of the word, although to be frank he'd fit right in with today's hipsters, too.
Humiliation Conga: After he is not invited to join SCDP, he works for McCann Erickson but is fired. He then goes through a series of jobs at other agencies until he is reduced to work as an in-house copywriter for A&P. Then he loses that job as well.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: His huge ego and pompous demeanor are often shown to be a cover for his deep insecurities borne from his working-class background and beneath it all, is just desperate for some respect and acceptance.
Joisey: He apparently had a really thick accent before he went to Princeton. He still lives in New Jersey through the early seasons (Season 2 opens at a party at his apartment in Montclair).
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: He's very pretentious and arrogant, though it's repeatedly made clear that he's something of a dunce and everyone eventually comes to see that Peggy and Smitty are more talented copywriters.
Morality Pet: In "Christmas Waltz", he becomes Harry's.
Most Writers Are Writers: He tries, anyway.
Old Shame: It's revealed that he went to Princeton on a scholarship in season 3, implying he's from lower-class roots and he doesn't want anyone else to know.
Pride: His inflated, sensitive ego makes him hard to get along with and contributes to his Butt-Monkey status, but the really fatal example of this can be inferred from offscreen. When Crane asks Peggy why Kinsey was never brought on at SCDP, she responds that he never applied, suggesting that his pride was too bruised to consider that they might have given him a second shot. Contrast to Cosgrove, who was also left behind initially but made his way back to SCDP in short order.
Put on a Bus: He isn't hired by SCDP and thus leaves the cast after Season 3.
The Bus Came Back: After being absent for the entirety of Season 4, he shows up once more in Season 5's "Christmas Waltz," where it is revealed that he has joined the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. At the end of that episode, he is put more literally and permanently on a bus, to Hollywood by Harry Crane.
Shock Value Relationship: He dates a black woman to show how "progressive" he is. It doesn't take her long to figure it out.
Small Name, Big Ego: A fairly frail ego at that.
Soapbox Sadie: Against the destruction of Penn Station.
Some of My Best Friends Are X: In an attempt to show how progressive he is to his black girlfriend, Paul pretends he's on a first name basis with the African American elevator attendant.
The Un-Favorite: Has very clearly become this compared to Peggy by mid-late Season 3, with Don considering him a spent force creatively and being thoroughly sick of his politics. Harry even admits privately to Pete in Season 5 that even if the McCann-Erickson buyout hadn't gone ahead, then sooner or later Don would probably have fired him anyway.