'50s Hair: Starts off with a curled ponytail and very short bangs, later she gets her hair cut into a more fashionable flip that she maintains with slight changes, into the Seventies.
'60s Hair: She starts wearing her hair in a popular flip in Season 2, sometimes wearing her hair in the poufy bobs and pageboys of that era with her hair looking less product heavy as time goes on.
'70s Hair: Her 60s flips still look conservative and use hairspray but they started looking more low-maintenance with more movement; Still fits as many women in professional settings often maintained conservative styles.
Afraid of Blood: In Season 3, she faints when she sees a man bleeding from a tractor injury with his foot cut off. By Season 6 and 7, she keeps her head together and helps the bleeder.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: Throughout the series, Peggy displays an overt (some would say unhealthy) attraction towards men with aggressive personalities - men who prioritize their own desires and who don't shy away from fulfilling them at the expense of others. Ultimately subverted when she gets together with Stan Rizzo in the series finale.
Always Someone Better: Over the course of season 3, Peggy becomes this in relation to Paul Kinsey. By the end of the season, Don chooses Peggy over Paul as his lead copywriter.
Author Avatar: Word of God has it that her complex protegee-mentor relationship with Don draws a lot from the time when Matthew Weiner worked under David Chase's wing in The Sopranos.
Berserk Button: Peggy hates it when people imply that she became a copywriter by sleeping with Don.
Big, Thin, Short Trio: At 5'3", the Short to Stan's Big and Michael's Thin.
Brainy Brunette: She's brunette and one of the smarter characters in the series.
Broken Pedestal: For years, she idolized Don and looked up to him. By the end of Season 6, she can barely stand him. The pedestal is slightly rebuilt, not to the extent it was but she still cares about him.
Career Versus Man: A major theme of her character arc. Peggy's success at her job (and the long hours and energy it demands) repeatedly comes at the expense of her romantic relationships. Subverted in the finale, she gets together with Stan (who is sweetly snarky yet supportive) and is on the path to becoming a creative director.
The Chains of Commanding: It takes Peggy some time to accept that she can't be both a productive team leader and a nice friend to her underlings.
Culturally Religious: Her faith at the very least took a big dent over her pregnancy, but as there's no escaping the Church, she still goes to Mass off and on, does the posters for a CYO dance, and creates an ad for Popsicles inspired by Catholic iconography. The church's new, young priest takes an interest in her and tries to steer her back towards the religion. Later in the series, she clearly is out of the Church and makes references to having been raised in the religion and before one flight (before the Moon Landing) she crosses her self which makes Harry nervous.
Defiled Forever: Played with. After being seduced by Pete, she seems to struggle intensely with having a romantic relationship for basically the entire series, although she eventually ends up happy.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Not that she's the biggest Ice Queen in the show (that title can go to Betty and Joan), but often she can be rather tough on those around her, yet there are times where she warms up and is friendly with people like her co-workers or Julio.
Deuteragonist: Peggy's story gets the most time and attention after Don's.
Distaff Counterpart: Peggy is developing into one for Don, adopting many of his mannerisms and personality traits.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: A pioneering woman who feels unappreciated at times, but her bosses point out that she has a meteoric career despite being under thirty.
Earn Your Happy Ending: You don't have to tell Peggy that she has to work for what she's worth; she worked her way up from a shy, mousily dressed secretary with a ponytail to a more confident, tougher Copy Chief and finally doesn't have to choose between her love life and career.
Erudite Stoner: Like the rest of Creative (except Don), she smokes a fair bit of pot for inspiration by Season 5 (1966-67).
Friendly Enemy: She's still on good terms with Don, even when they are competitors.
Family Versus Career: Her sister resents that she gave birth to a child, gave him up, and seemingly went on with her life (and career) as if it never happened. Peggy does focus on advancing her career but in "The Suitcase", she reveals to Don that she can't help but wonder about the child she gave up.
Glamorous Single Mother: Subverted. Peggy's career grows during the course of the series and she develops a thicker skin and confidence along with more flattering hair and clothes. Yet it's implied she has to avoid thinking about the baby she had to give up just to get by.
Don: Do you ever think about it?
Peggy: I try not to. But then it comes up out of nowhere. Playgrounds.
The Glorious War of Sisterly Rivalry: Has this slightly with her devout Catholic housewife sister Anita.
Hidden Depths: "Lost Horizon" reveals she's a very adept roller skater and was shown to be enthusiastically acing the Twist earlier on.
High-Powered Career Woman: Peggy starts off as just a receptionist but dreams of more and the show follows her pursuit of becoming an advertising executive during the late 1950s and '60s. She frequently faces overt sexism from just about everyone she works with (including but certainly not limited to taunts from Sexy Secretary Joan and false accusations of her sleeping with Don to get the job in the beginning), which morphs her into an Iron Lady of sorts by the series end, in contrast to her Plucky Office Girl role in the beginning. She also struggles in her personal life finding a balance between Career Versus Man.
I Am Not Pretty: Expresses this worry in the season four episode The Suitcase where she admits to Don she doesn't like dating and she has a hard time with it and "men don't exactly stop and take a look at me", doesn't help she (despite being played by a beautiful albeit less conventionally attractive Elisabeth Moss) works in an industry where there are a lot of drop dead gorgeous models being used and hired as secretaries and the men around her seem to look down on women who don't look like a movie star.
Important Haircut: During season 2, her long dainty ponytail is sheared off and styled into an aggressive no-nonsense business cut to reaffirm her days as a secretary are over.
Improbable Age: She's the copy chief at one of the best ad agencies in the country and she's not even thirty.
Innocent Blue Eyes: She has striking blue eyes and starts off as a shy Naïve Newcomer and, if not pure, she is one of the few people on the show who has their act together and is a relatable heroic character.
Intergenerational Friendship: With Julio, a young boy that lives in the same apartment building as her and comes over to watch tv, as of the 7th season.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Not as bad as her colleagues or boss, she has become more curt and prickly as the years go on; however her sense of fairness and care don't waver, and tends to be tender with those close to her, more likely to forgive, and can back up her colleagues.
Karma Houdini: How her sister perceives her for having a baby out of wedlock and giving it up for adoption, returning to her job like nothing happened, at a time when there was still a heavy stigma on unwed mothers.
Law of Inverse Fertility: While on birth control (albeit, just starting to use it), she becomes pregnant by Pete Campbell and gives birth to his child. This surfaces during the second season, at the same time that he and his wife are unsuccessfully trying to conceive.
Leg Focus: A more subdued version of the trope, as it's not so much about sex appeal as it is about the later styles and her burgeoning confidence; Joan notes her as having "darling little ankles" that need to be shown off and as the 60s go on, her skirts reveal more leg, but the penultimate moment is when she shakes down Roger for money after he gives her extra work◊.
Married to the Job: She even chooses staying at work on her birthday instead of spending it with her boyfriend and family.
My Beloved Smother: Her mother is a classic example, constantly nagging her to go to church and trying to set her up with men, taking her decision to move from Brooklyn to Manhattan (where her job is) as a personal betrayal, and sowing enough Catholic guilt for Peggy to reap for a lifetime. (However, she does seem to have been touchingly supportive about the fact that Peggy got pregnant out of wedlock about five minutes into the flashy Manhattan job that worries her so much.)
No Accounting for Taste: Pete Campbell, Duck Phillips, Mark, Abe, Ted....the number of fuckwits she's been with is astounding; she later averts this after getting together with Stan.
No Social Skills: For the first couple of seasons she has a habit of occasionally seeming pretentious, and breaking bad news in the worst ways possible. By the time she starts working at SCDP she's largely grown out of these habits.
Odd Friendship: With a few people on the show, what's odd is that usually said people have insulted her before, but she has grown a thicker skin and makes them learn to respect her as a person. She fights and bonds with Joan, she and Stan are polar opposites and have friendly arguments and confidences then moves beyond "just good friends", and she forms a personal relationship of Amicable Exes with Pete. Also seems to be forming one with Roger by the end of the series.
Old Maid: Not that she spends 100% of her time worrying about it, but she, like Joan before her, gets angsted by the expectations of women in her generation and worried about becoming one of those women she hates... one that lies about her age.
One of the Boys: Once she becomes a copywriter, she spends her time with other men instead of the secretaries (two female friends being Joyce and Megan). In Season 4, she accompanies Don to the men's room when he throws up, a symbolic representation of her transition to one of the guys; After becoming a copywriter, her fashion also changes, wearing dresses and skirt suits styled to resemble menswear.
Only Sane Woman: Even after she gets more in-depth with the office politics and shenanigans of her peers, she still remains in the middle of things and an apt observer.
Out of Focus: While she's still a major character, Peggy has less to do in season 3 compared to the show's other years. In fact, it's the one time Elisabeth Moss was nominated as a supporting actress rather than a lead.
Parental Substitute: To her neighbor Julio in Season 7, the boy spends time watching tv with her in her apartment and confides in her, feeling his mother doesn't care. An acute example, due to him being around the same age as the baby Peggy gave up, something she frequently thinks about.
Plucky Office Girl: She gets hired as a secretary, but her comments on a lipstick project in which the secretaries are used as guinea pigs get her noticed, and she becomes a copywriter and a rising star.
Servile Snarker: Develops into one.
She Cleans Up Nicely: Gets one of these moments at the end of a season 2 episode, and in general as she starts to dress (in Joan's words) "less like a little girl" over the season and into season 3; her wardrobe gets upgraded after becoming Copy Chief and even more so in her thirties, topped off with her entrance into McCann Erickson.
Shrinking Violet: Particularly in season one, she was incredibly shy, modest, and afraid to risk losing her job by standing up for herself. But she learns to shake this off once she realizes what she could achieve in the company if she gets a tougher hide.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Peggy is wrapped up in her career, but she does want a guy that understands her, shares her passions, loves her, and isn't threatened by her force of personality nor her success. She gets that with Stan at the end.
The Smurfette Principle: Once she's promoted from secretary, the only female copywriter at the firm. Justified in that this is the early 60's and the second wave of feminism won't really kick it into high gear for nearly a decade. Useful to the agency (in addition to her talent) in that she brings a female perspective to the boys club of advertising. Has complained about only being given the "girly" accounts (bras, lipstick, diet soda, etc).
"Success Through Sex" Accusation: People assume Peggy had to have slept with Don because how else does a secretary get promoted to copywriter? In reality, Peggy strictly got the position on her own merits; Don meanwhile has a strict rule against sleeping with secretaries (which goes out the window after Megan is hired).
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: Prickly to a fault, yet can be very tender and protective of her friends, co-workers, mentors, and Stan.
Supporting Protagonist: While Don Draper is inarguably the main character, the series opens up on her first day at the office, and the show's longest running consistent arc seems to be her own evolution as she rises to the top.
Surprise Pregnancy: At the end of season one she gives birth, much to her surprise.
Took a Level in Badass: Turning down Don's demand that she join SCDP in the season 3 finale, because of the simple fact he hasn't asked her. He needs her so much, he ends up begging her to join.
And another one in "The Other Woman"; when she figures out that Don and the rest of SCDP have been taking her for granted, she quits her job and takes an offer with CGC making triple what Sterling Cooper was paying her.
And in "Lost Horizon", she walks into McCann Erickson with the aura of giving no fucks.
Took a Level in Jerkass: By Season 7, her lack of a love life has turned her into a paranoid wreck, then by The Runaways she's back in form (having a close kinship with a child and having to deal with Ginsberg amongst other things) and just mellowed out into her prickly yet righteous self.
The Un-Favourite: To her mother because of the baby and because she's putting her career ahead of finding a husband.
Ungrateful Bastard: On Don's return in season seven, she antagonizes him the most by telling him they've been functioning just fine since his absence, forgetting or ignoring that he helped start the agency, is the reason she is no longer a secretary, was Joan's ally when Pete pimped her out to Jaguar, and has the talent to save the agency from falling on its collective ass. She also seems to blame Don for breaking up her and Ted, even though Ted was the one who truly instigated the breakup out of an unwillingness to break up his family. Her relationship with Don is mended soon and she forgets about Ted.
Vocal Evolution: When she starts out as a secretary, she speaks in a girlish whisper. Her voice becomes more commanding as she rises in her career.
Well, Excuse Me, Princess!: Behaves this way with Stan, calling him out for slacking off, arguing with him and gets together with him.