'50s Hair: In the earlier seasons, he has a pomaded haircut that would fit into a prep school or on American Bandstand.
'60s Hair: His hair gets less product heavy looking (the popular "Dry Look") as time goes on until Season 7 comes and he gets...
'70s Hair: By Season 7, he has sideburns and combover that veritably scream "I am a middle-aged businessman in the 1970s!"
Afraid of Needles: Mentioned during the blood drive.
Always Someone Better: Don is often this to him.
Amicable Exes:
He and Trudy seem to settle into these roles by the point of Season 7B, if "Time & Life" is representative of anything. They get back together in the "Milk and Honey Route".
He develops a similar relationship with Peggy starting in Season 4, after engaging in friendly banter with slight tension in previous seasons; he even departs, giving her best wishes and the prediction she will be Creative Director by the year 1980.
The Barnum: Like most of the cast, Pete's willing to sell any product.
Batman Gambit: He figures out that Roger has been reading his secretary's calendar in order to poach his accounts, and so he has his secretary write in a fictional meeting with Coca-Cola at 6 in the morning at the Staten Island Ferry Building. It works.
Butt-Monkey: Of all the characters in the office, he tends to have the highest amount of slap-stick, being slapped, punched, tripping downstairs, and running into support beams frequently.
Did Not Think This Through: Pete doesn't realize that working to impress the executives of General Motors at Detroit is going to require some driving skills, as Ken exemplified in the past.
Disappeared Dad: Hardly around his daughter Tammy so much that when he comes to visit her in "The Strategy", the little girl doesn't recognize him. He does get better, and by the last season, he is a loving doting father to Tammy who absolutely adores him.
Divorce Is Temporary: He and Trudy divorce around Season 6, but they get back together at the end of the series.
Drives Like Crazy: Not really crazy, but very poorly, and his lack of skill as a driver repeatedly figures as a plot point.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: After Lucky Strike switched to another firm, Pete surpassed Roger in terms of contributions to SCDP's profits. Despite this, he still has the worst office in the building and is not pleased about it (he eventually gets Harry's office, but it doesn't stop him from feeling he deserves ''Roger's"). To add insult to injury, Roger then starts to poach potential customers from him and Pete can't officially do anything about it.
Earn Your Happy Ending: He ends the series on a high note with being hired by Learjet and moving to Wichita with Trudy and Tammy, their divorce now dissolved.
Entitled to Have You: Pete does Type B with a German au pair that his neighbors hired. He goes through some trouble to fix a dress with red wine or some such spilled on it, but it's only after he returns it that she tells him she already has a boyfriend. Her reactions indicate that it was naivete about his intentions rather than an attempt to use him, but he still forces himself on her a bit later. This comes back to bite him when the neighbor finds out.
Famous Ancestor:
He is a descendant of the (non-fictional) Campbell family of the (equally non-fictional) Glencoe Massacre legend. This becomes an issue when he finds out that a headmaster refuses admission to his daughter in a school because he's a MacDonald (the victims of the massacre). Pete punches him out, stating that his family were carrying out the King's orders by violating Sacred Hospitality (actually the justification members of Clan Campbell use to defend themselves in arguments about the massacre to this day).
He is also (on his mother's side) a member of the (non-fictional) Dyckman family, descendants of the Dutch farmer William Dyckman, who owned a massive tract of land in Harlem way back when it was the rural north end of the island of Manhattan; a major thoroughfare in Upper Manhattan is named after the family.
First Girl Wins: He and Trudy, his wife to whom he was newly married at the start of the season, end up disolving their divorce and moving to Kansas to be together.
Formerly Fit: By the end of the series, he gets chubbier and his hairline starts deciding (though not fat or unattractively so) in contrast to the lean, Boy Band look he had in the beginning.
Go Seduce My Arch Nemesis: A painfully mundane example; he asks Trudy to somehow convince an ex-boyfriend to publish a short story of his in a reputable magazine. Trudy stopping short of actual adultery relegates the story to "Boy's Life".
Gold Digger: Surprisingly averted. He did marry into money, but was unaware of his family's drop in wealth until after he was married for over a year. Also, if anything, he resents his father-in-law for always trying to help financially. He does, however, want his business and has made no secret of it.
Gosh Dang It to Heck!: Hates profanities, to the point of being genuinely offended whenever anyone F-bombs in his presence. "Hell's bells" is about as extreme as his language gets.
Has a Type: His three love interests (Trudy, Peggy and Beth) are slender brunettes with a youthful appearance and big blue eyes. This should also give away his narcissism: the same description applies to him as well. Lampshaded in an occassion when he visits Beth claiming he is her brother and part of the reason he is believed is the apparent Strong Family Resemblance.
Heel–Face Revolving Door: Depends on the situation and the week.
Henpecked Husband: Feels like this in his marriage as of Season 5. He is about as far from this as can be in the first two or three seasons (his wife was just as — arguably more — submissive than Betty), as can be seen in "The Mountain King" and "The New Girl". However, towards the end (last two episodes) of season three and then on, Trudy becomes very nagging of the man.
Hidden Depths: Despite hailing from a privileged background and acting like a brown-nosing greenhorn in the first season, he has an eye for social change that the dinosaurs at SC sorely lack; though they scoff at him for predicting things like the trend of humorous advertising, or that Kennedy was going to beat Nixon, (He doesn't even wear a hat!) he turns out to be right. He is completely baffled as to why the senior leadership of Sterling Cooper and their clients aren't going after African-American customers, as to his eyes they are consumers who no one is trying to reach (and in the case of the clients, black people seem to be buying their products anyway). He is also always disgusted when he comes across racism. This relative colorblindness is rather progressive for the time, to say the least. He and Trudy also do a pretty good Charleston.
Hypocrite: He callously cheated on Trudy from before they were even married, but when he goes home to visit Tammy while he and Trudy were in the process of divorcing, he acts disgusted when it looks like she went out on a date.
I Just Want to Be You: He's obsessed with living up to the ideal of the "red-blooded American male", his most obvious example being Don. By season five, his life almost exactly resembles Don's back in season one — and he still hasn't caught on that Don was as miserable then as Pete is now.
Impoverished Patrician: He comes from one of the oldest Dutch families in America, with a million connections in Manhattan, but due to a combination of being The Un-Favorite and his spendthrift father having nothing to leave when he dies, he becomes beholden to his Nouveau Riche parents-in-law, which puts a strain on his marriage.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: His need for approval.
It's All About Me: Though he occasionally starts showing signs of growing out of it, this is pretty much his raison d'etre.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Sure, he's petulant and selfish, but he has progressive views on race relations for the time.
Jerkass: Despite displaying such progressive sentiments, this doesn't stop him from having Joan literally prostitute herself in order to secure a business deal with Jaguar in "The Other Woman".
Love Confession: He does it twice during the series:
In Season 2, after a season of tension between him and Trudy for failing to conceive a baby, he confesses his feelings for Peggy, telling her he should have gotten with her instead. Peggy replies that she has renounced to guilt him into being with her when she had his child. The reveal sinks their ship for good.
In Season 7B, after roughly two after his separation from Trudy, he comes to understand that he had loved her all along and manages to save their marriage confessing his love and the intention of starting a new life together with their daughter.
Love Redeems: Downplayed, but he becomes a much more tolerable person through his affection for Peggy, which borders on Pet the Dog given how loathsome he is, and then much more tolerable again when he and Trudy end up happy together.
Narcissist: An even more severe example than Don. Despite having a deep-rooted craving for others' respect and praise, he views nearly everyone around him with barely disguised contempt and shows hardly any qualms about exploiting others to advance his own interests regardless of the circumstances.
Older Than They Look: Naturally, as he is played by Vincent Kartheiser. In an attempt to mitigate this, Kartheiser shaved his hair in a way to make it look as though Pete's hairline is receding.
Papa Wolf: Punches a headmaster that's keeping Tammy from being admitted because she failed a stick figure test and over a centuries-old family grudge.
Politically Correct Villain: "Villain" is too strong of a word to describe him, but he's still a colossal Jerkass who cheats on his wife, makes the women he cheats with her on cheat on their own significant others, and is often the most antagonistic force against Don. He's also one of the biggest supporters of the Civil Rights Movement (enough that he lashes out at Harry when he sees MLK's death as a skewed priority) and once called out Roger for his Japanophobia against the Honda executives.
Pretty Boy: He's much more boyish and soft looking than the other more debonair men in the office. His pretty-boy looks may have scored him a brief fling with Peggy, but over the next few seasons, his hairline starts to recede more, contrasting his youthful face.
Really Gets Around: Ranks third in this regard, only behind Don and Roger.
Small Name, Big Ego: Pete believes that his upbringing entitles him to the respect of his peers. He grows out of this after his various schemes end in his own humiliation.
Smug Snake: Again, he's improving - until season five's "Signal 30", where he resumes being a pain in the ass.
This Loser Is You: Everybody wants to be Don, but most people are like Pete ... uncharismatic, flawed and average.
Took a Level in Badass:
In season four's "The Chrysanthemum and the Sword", taking point on the Honda account and verbally eviscerating Roger over his prejudice.
Also, in covering for Don after the security probe threatens to reveal his ruse.
In season 5 he starts demanding more respect from the partners (especially Roger) and retaliates when Roger starts poaching his clients.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Zigzagged over the course of the series.
Took a Level in Kindness: Season 7B shows him being much more involved in his daughter's life, more protective and loving with Trudy, supportive of Peggy and Joan, and basically relaxing more. He's also let go of the competition with Don that only existed in his own mind, and became one of his staunchest supporters when Don fell out of favor with the agency.
The Un-Favorite: In both his personal and professional life, he's generally not respected.
White Anglo-Saxon Protestant: The most out of the main cast with his remarks, preppy casual style, and surprisingly historic heritage. Bert has to warn Don and Roger of Pete's family background when they consider firing him.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: He never got his father's approval before he died, which just adds more to his inferiority complex. His desire for Don's approval reflects this, but he's really bad at taking good advice.