'50s Hair: Starts off with very conservative styles of that era.
'70s Hair: He grows out his sideburns, the top of this hair, and even adds a mustache to his look.
The Alcoholic: An unapologetic expert on the subject.
You (Don) don't know how to drink. Your whole generation, you drink for the wrong reasons. My generation, we drink because it's good, because it feels better than unbuttoning your collar, because we deserve it. We drink because it's what men do.
Amicable Exes: Given his serial philandering it's pretty weird to see that he retains a good relationship with all his exes (Mona, Joan, Jane). Maybe his Gentleman Snarker personality is a reason.
The Artifact: In-Universe, Season 5 drives the point home that Roger is getting overshadowed by both Don (who is the true brains behind the agency) and Pete (who does all the leg work in getting new accounts). Roger, meanwhile, is revealed to be coasting on his family name (he inherited his position in the company).
Bad Boss: Roger treats his employees (with the exception of Don) pretty terribly, frequently belittling them and cracking rude jokes at their expense. At least twice throughout the series he fires a valuable, hard-working employee (Sal Romano in Season 3, Ken Cosgrove in Season 7) simply because someone important wanted them gone, and he didn't even try to put up a fight for them.
The Barnum: Like the rest of the cast, Roger is willing to sell just about anything.
Berserk Button: Do not expect Roger to react rationally around the Japanese; he's still angry with them over Pearl Harbor. ... or so he says — he's a veteran naval officer who fought at Okinawa, so it may be more personal than that
Break the Haughty: Roger's fast-living, hard drinking, womanizing lifestyle has been shown to have consequences. He's survived a heart attack — not that it really slowed him down too much — and he's confronting the reality that in this new agency, he might be superfluous.
Brilliant, but Lazy: One of the reasons he finds himself overshadowed. He is actually a brilliant account man, but mostly coasts by. Witness his most dazzling display of competency (getting a meeting with Chevy), which he accomplished with brilliant seduction and subterfuge, which he hardly ever musters up the willpower to repeat.
Butt-Monkey: Despite his vivacious façade, he's unable to stay happy for too long. He eventually loses the Lucky Strike account (which, like his place in the company, was inherited from his father) and his decay is more evident and pathetic in Season 5 when he becomes a joke who stays afloat thanks to his pocket money, which he has to hand away. In Season 6, his mother passes away and he becomes estranged to his daughter.
The Charmer: At first, due to his extreme wit. He starts behaving more and more like a Dirty Old Man.
Cool Old Guy: The first cast member to try LSD. Later in the series, he relates more to the hippies than to the establishment, who in turn seem to see him as this.
Deadpan Snarker: Has a snarky one-liner for virtually every occasion.
Dirty Old Man: While he's not that old, he still fits — particularly in the beginning of "The Long Weekend."
Drop-In Character: An at work example. Spends at least as much time in Don's office as his own, usually just to mooch a drink.
Erudite Stoner: He's trying to become one using LSD. He later becomes a very vocal proponent of it to anyone that will listen.
Fake Guest Star: Credited as a special guest star in Season 1 even though Roger is one of the main characters in almost every episode. Tellingly, he was nominated at the Emmys as a supporting actor rather than a guest actor that year.
Handsome Lech: "When God closes a door, he opens a dress."
Happily Married: To Marie at the end of Person to Person.
Happiness Realized Too Late: Roger has spent decades cheating on his first (age-appropriate) wife Mona with women young enough to be his daughter(s). When he marries Jane (who is literally his daughter's age), he is miserable and realizes that he misses Mona. Although they don't get back together, he eventually ends up with Marie Calvet, who is also his own age and matches him.
Honorary Uncle: Takes up this role for Don's children, the fun "Uncle Roger". Also settles in this role for Joan's son Kevin, actually his illegitimate son.
Ironic Name: "Sterling" refers to being a person of the highest quality, and Roger isn't a very good person much of the time.
It Will Never Catch On: "Psychiatry is just this year's candy pink stove." says the man in the second episode. By Season 6, he's seeing a shrink.
Jaded Washout: An unusual wealthy example. A privileged member of The Greatest Generation, Roger is a man in a permanent decline who longs for the good old days and struggles to avoid irrelevance while looking for meaning and purpose in everchanging times.
No more Sterling Cooper, and no more Sterlings...
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: The man pays little regard to politeness. He is not without decency, but you have to look for the good parts pretty hard.
Lack of Empathy: Played with, it seems to be a coping mechanism. When his mother dies, he not only appears callously unaffected, he's also annoyed by his secretary genuinely mourning over his loss, but eventually Roger breaks down in tears.
Ladykiller in Love: Genuinely had affection for Joan, but mostly cared more for her body, and later he hooks up with and marries Marie Calvet.
Manchild: Self-confessed; after he starts to explore the counterculture, he describes himself as a "curious child".
Manly Facial Hair: He decides to add a truly magnificent moustache to his look in the final season. You can see it in all it's glory above.
May–December Romance: Had many relationships or hook ups with women at least a decade younger than him (Joan, Jane, twin models, a flight attendant, a group of hippie girls, etc.) before settling down with a woman closer to his age... Marie.
Meaningful Name: "Sterling" is another word for money, and Roger is quite well-off. It's also a synonym for "silver", and he wears a lot of the color — and is noted for his gray (i.e. silver) hair, to boot.
Mike Nelson, Destroyer of Worlds: He indirectly ends up destroying both the original Sterling-Cooper, and then later on SC&P; in the former case because he pushes to allow a buy-out by Puttnam, Powell & Lowe in order to get money for his impending divorce, and in the latter case because he ends up selling a controlling interesting in the company to McCann-Erickson in order to save Don. In both cases it has the same result: McCann-Erickson absorbs the company and lays off most of the staff, after buying out PPL in the former case, and directly in the latter.
Most Writers Are Writers: Spent a lot of his time offscreen during the seasons working on an autobiography, or rather, making lots and lots of drunken tape recordings and having someone else write it down for him. Upon hearing that Ken is secretly a successful published author, he becomes jealous because of the lack of sales on his autobiography.
Pet the Dog:
Roger is extremely passionate in arguing for Don's case against the rest of the firm's partners.
Despite his shortcomings as a father, he is a completely doting grandfather. He also makes sure that his bastard son will be well off.
Pair the Spares: With Marie, Megan's mother after he divorces Jane and she divorces Megan's father, Emil.
Pass the Popcorn: His reaction to Lane challenging Pete to a fistfight:
"I know that cooler heads should prevail, but am I the only one who wants to see this?"
Platonic Co-Parenting: Toyed with. At some point, Roger does work out that Kevin is his son. He passively takes part in Kevin's life by dropping over gifts and making sure that he is accounted for in his will.
Pointy-Haired Boss: The times he has to do actual management over his underlings.
Well, I gotta go learn a bunch of people's names before I fire them.
Polyamory: Late in the series he starts living with a bunch of hippie girls with very open attitudes. When he comes home and finds one of the girls and another guy asleep in their bed, he just tells them to move over.
Promoted to Opening Titles: Already has a prominent special guest credit in scene one, but gets the And Starring treatment from season 2 onwards.
Put on a Bus: Near the end of season 1 when he suffers a heart attack. He then has a brief return, but after undergoing yet another attack, he then doesn't appear again for the last episodes of the season. He's back by the time of season 2.
Really Gets Around: Only surpassed by Don in the scorecard.
Sad Clown: Underneath the jokes and playboy exterior, he is a deeply unhappy man.
Shell-Shocked Veteran: Would appear to the case, given his continued hostility towards the Japanese and underlying emotional issues.
Silver Fox: Despite having grey hair, Roger is still rather attractive and very promiscuous.
Slouch of Villainy: The villain part is downplayed, but his remarkable assholism is often underscored by his postures when he's using a chair or a couch.
Sophisticated as Hell: Providing many Funny Moments.
"I wanna tell you something because you're very dear to me. And I hope you understand it comes from the bottom of my damaged, damaged heart. You are the finest piece of ass I ever had, and I don't care who knows it."
Stepford Snarker: Roger uses humor to deflect or cope with many unpleasant aspects of his unbalanced life.
Took a Level in Badass: Early in "Waterloo," Cooper says that Roger has many talents, but isn't really a leader. After Cooper dies later in the episode, Roger realizes that Cutler will now be able to easily get rid of Don (and in the longer run, will probably force him and Pete out too for being Don's main allies), he sets up a deal to partly sell the agency to McCann Ericson, which both secures Don's job and makes Roger the president of SC&P. Unfortunately, this turns into a case of Nice Job Breaking It, Hero! the following season, when it's announced that McCann Ericson are fully absorbing the agency.
Tragic Bigot: His hostility towards the Japanese is implied to be due to the traumatic things he saw in the Pacific Theater.
True Companions:
By Season 7, we find out that he truly is this to Don. While they fought on several occasions beforehand and Roger signed off on Don's leave of absence at the end of Season 6 (with Don's own best interests in mind, and fully intending to bring him back once he straightened himself up), the events of "Field Trip" show him bringing Don back to the firm and arguing his case vehemently against Cutler and Joan. In "Waterloo", after Bert's death, Roger bemoans that Cutler has enough power to force Don from the firm, and opines to his friend that "I'm losing you, too".
The events of "Waterloo" show that Roger and Bert were these, too. They had their issues, but Roger cared deeply for him, and the feeling was returned.
Unconfessed Unemployment: When Lucky Strike, Roger's only account, drops SCDP (which may as well mean the death of the firm), he keeps it a secret trying to somehow control the disaster. When the truth gets out, he puts up a shameful charade trying to keep face.
Waistcoat of Style: His waistcoats stand out in an already sharp and well-dressed environment.
What Did I Do Last Night?: At play when he hires Don ... or rather, goes out drinking with him and states that he's not going to hire him. However, he gets so drunk that he doesn't remember this, and when Don shows up the next day claiming that Roger told him he was hired, Roger —who doesn't remember anything of what happened — just goes along with it. Naturally, he later takes the credit for being the man who discovered and hired Don.