'60s Hair: He starts the series with a crewcut, until he starts growing it out in Season 6.
'70s Hair: By the end of the series he grew from a crewcut to a fuller mane and beard.
Ambiguously Jewish: He has a large poster of a man who appears to be Moshe Dayan hanging over his bed. On the other hand, his name is stereotypically Italian.
Big Beautiful Man: He's always been tall and built, but later put on some weight with a visible belly along with facial hair; nobody complains and he's found sexy.
Big Brother Instinct: Revealed to have this for his late cousin Robbie, when the latter died in Vietnam, Stan really took it hard.
Big, Thin, Short Trio: The Big to Michael's Thin and Peggy's Short.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Much of his obnoxious behavior is tolerated because he's quite good at his job.
Character Development: He goes from being chauvinistic and rather full of himself, to being understanding and caring towards his co-workers, especially Peggy.
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: Portrayed by the 5'11" Ferguson, and as of "Person to Person" gets together with the more petite Peggy.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: Given the events of Person To Person, one can see Stan encouraging Peggy to go to Paris with Mathis's brother-in-law in Severance just for her to loosen up, as this trope.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: Peggy would be the first to say he does have an ego and New Business reveals him to wrestle with that and a crippling insecurity about his work, one that a client is able to use for getting the upper hand on him.
Jerk Jock: His chauvinistic demeanor and clean-cut looks during his first appearances give vibes of this trope. He outgrows it by the time the characters move over from SC to SCDP.
Ladykiller in Love: Is a Casanova Wannabe and had some one night stands, yet is revealed to be in love with Peggy.
Major Injury Underreaction: While high on the energy booster given to him by Cutler's doctor, he has the others try to hit a piece of paper with a picture of an apple on it that's above his head with their pens. Michael tries and ends up hitting his arm with a craft razor that was in the pen-cup. Stan responds with an "Aw Crap" that sounds more like he spilled water on himself.
Odd Couple: His officemate is Peggy. They even keep in touch after Peggy hops over to Ted Chaough's firm; later after the merger and a few breakups between them, they can arguably be called an Official Odd Couple.
Only Sane Man: Is a Creative with co-workers like the irreverent and unprofessional Mathis, a few other immature copywriter guys, a stressed out Peggy who lives for work, a few bosses who've been here and there, and Cloudcuckoolander Michael Ginsberg.
Raging Stiffie: In his introductory episode, when Peggy challenges him to put his money where his mouth is and work, alongside her, in the nude.
The Stoner: In season six, he's constantly seen smoking marijuana in the SCDP offices. He gets away with it because he claims to do better work when stoned.
Team Dad: Became this; Michael calls him "a Mother Hen" and pretty much keeps his own wits together in the face of an alcoholic boss, a boss with a Small Name, Big Ego, a Cloudcuckoolander colleague, and a copy chief he's in love with who tends to get nervous and is Married to the Job.
Took a Level in Kindness: While he still has some very brash moments, Stan is unquestionably much more kind-hearted and noble than the loud obnoxious fratboy he started as. (Discovering pot seems to have helped.)
Understanding Boyfriend: Been the platonic and non-fantasy sort for Peggy and finally officially her romantic partner at the end of the series.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Stan and Peggy settle into this relationship until they declare their love for each other in the series finale.