Affably Evil: Frank is easily the most personally pleasant employee of Waystar-Royco; he's mild-mannered, cultured, honest and witty. He's also loyal to a media monster and is willing to enact his wishes regardless of the ethical considerations.
Ambiguously Evil: On one hand, Frank comes across as genuinely nice guy who lacks the corruption of others in Logan's circle, with him never committing any heinous actions onscreen. But the fact that he works at Waystar and made it up high enough to where he is means it's more likely than not that Frank's dirtied his hands a bit. Still, as we've yet to see any of this, it's possible Frank's clean and made it as far as he has by just being smart and loyal.
The Bus Came Back: After being fired for his part in the attempted coup, Logan brings him back in to negotiate a deal with the Pierces, because they were charmed by his Shakespeare recitations.
Butt-Monkey: Frank really does not have the best time working for Waystar-Royco. After being a loyal advisor to Logan for decades and someone who considers Logan a friend, he's fired unceremoniously in the very first episode to make way for Roman, who he got stuck babysitting for months and who now irrationally hates Frank. From that point on, he's trapped in the orbit of the Roy family, seemingly unable to cut himself loose.
Gerri: He said he offered you your job back.
Frank: Yeah. I'm considering.
Gerri: Why?
Frank: I need money to pay someone to kill a guy in Palermo. Baby needs shoes, moth to a flame... I don't know.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: He doesn’t enjoy it, but goes behind Logan’s back multiple times, and always seems to eventually deliver Kendall back into the hands of his father.
The Consigliere: He is a trusted long-time associate of Logan and often serves as a not-always-heeded voice of reason.
Deadpan Snarker: Less mean-spirited than the others, but he's got his share of snark aided by an extremely dry delivery.
Distaff Counterpart: To Gerri. Both are the closest members of Logan's inner circle, and both have a special relationship with one of the Roy sons (Kendall in Frank's case, and Gerri is also godmother to Shiv).
Everyone Has Standards:
He "feeds the piggies" as Logan asks during "Boar on the Floor", but he looks absolutely revolted while doing so.
He's utterly disgusted when Karl starts mocking Roman for crying at Logan's eulogy and sending a video of it around.
Extreme Doormat: When it comes to the Roys, he lets them run roughshod over him. Roman constantly insults and tries to oust him, but Frank never responds. Logan is also erratic when it comes to how he treats Frank.
Foil: To Kendall. Power and money-obsessed, likes to think he has a moral compass, the only one who knows any kind of pop culture (though more Shakespeare than cartoons and rap music) and will crawl back to Logan whenever given the chance.
Nice Guy: He's soft-spoken, polite and easy to get along with.
Not So Above It All: He treats Kendall a lot nicer as his godfather than actual father Logan does, but it’s not like he can actually help, and Logan uses him to target Kendall’s insecurities so that he’ll come over to Josh and shut up.
Only Sane Man: Comes with being one of the most moral people in the main cast.
Opportunistic Bastard: As soon as he hears about Kendall’s proxy battle plan, he wants in and to wet his beak as they’re friends.
Parental Substitute: Used to give Kendall flying lessons, and kinder than Logan is to him (to a point).
Punch-Clock Villain: Frank serves evil ends as part of Waystar-Royco, but seems to be one of the few members of Logan's inner circle that neither personally enjoyed it nor participated in the fraud or mass abuse. In the finale, even though he's one of the main parties in favor of selling the company to Matsson, he reminds everyone that it's a good deal.
Servile Snarker: He's a little too submissive to be as openly snarker as Gerri or even Karl, but he's got a sharp sense of humor all the same.
Frank: Are you now, or have you ever been, a member of the Cruise Dirty Sex Fuck Cover-up Party?
Sesquipedalian Loquaciousness: Frank's intelligence and education comes through most vividly through his use of language.
Frank: Shareholder meeting in two-and-a-half weeks. I mean, we are unusually subject to the vicissitudes of public opinion.
Karl: Uh, I can translate. That's Frank for "We're fucked".
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Roman's hated Frank ever since he was assigned to essentially babysit him at work. Frank doesn't bother responding to Roman's many put-downs.
Straight Man: Frank is one of the more even-tempered and rational characters, often offering a sensible appraisal and solution. He also tends not to bite when it comes to Logan's antics.
Token Good Teammate: He may stand by the Roys, but he doesn't display the same abhorrent behavior of them and their other employees.
Unknown Rival: Subverted. Frank is well aware that Roman despises him, but he's both mature enough and smart enough to not talk back to the son of his boss.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: Kendall hinted to Frank about the bear hug, which means it gets leaked, which means they have to accelerate it, which means Kendall has to confront his father and ripped to shreds by his family, which means he seeks out coke from a waiter, which means…
Useless Bystander Parent: Godfather, and it’s not like he can do much, but with what happens in “All the Bells Say” (Frank, Karl and Gerri work like nothing is happening while Logan scorns his children), Roman’s hatred of him seems to stem from knowing full well Logan’s abuse but doing nothing to stop it.
We Used to Be Friends: Frank is Kendall’s godfather and was a Parental Substitute for him. When Logan uses him to get Kendall to come down to see Josh (and plan being getting beaten down again and shutting up), Kendall’s angry at him. In the season three finale, when the kids are begging Logan and Caroline to not leave them in the dust, neither he, Gerri or Karl do anything to help. Season 4 has him siding against the siblings in the sale of the company to Matsson.
Wicked Cultured: He's fond of Shakespeare, to Logan's irritation. Not to mention he throws casual references to Coriolanus in conversation and says he internally recites Eliot’s “Prufrock” to calm his nerves before speeches.