Accidental Misnaming: Twice in the first two episodes, belying his Beneath Notice nature; first, Logan introduces him as Cousin Craig, and then he's listed on the Waystar employment records as Greg Roy, because nobody remembers his last name.
It later happens again in "Tailgate Party", when Mattson refers to him as "Gary" in a derisive manner.
Affably Evil: While being at Waystar has diminished much of his morals, he generally remains polite and genial. See Faux Affably Evil for what he has developed into.
Armor-Piercing Question: Even though Logan seems to shrug it off quickly, Greg being the one to have the balls to ask him "Where are your kids, Logan?" in deliberate mockery provokes an especially nasty, bitter outburst from Logan.
Audience Surrogate: As the only middle-class main character and a Naïve Newcomer to the family drama, he is the audience surrogate for the succession wars.
The Baby of the Bunch: He's the youngest character in the main cast, which, coupled with his Naïve Newcomer status, ensures that nobody takes him seriously.
Because You Were Nice to Me: One of the reasons behind his decision to side with his roommate/cousin Kendall in the finale of Season 2.
Beneath Notice: He is considered a doof by all other characters, which works to his advantage time and again as nobody expects him to be a real threat. The first time he shows his ruthless side is when he betrays Tom's plan to go public with the cruise crimes scandal to Gerri; even though Tom only shared this information with Shiv and Greg, he believes Greg over Shiv. By the end of Season 2, Greg is a pivotal player in the family's succession wars.
Beware the Nice Ones: Greg, of all people, becomes one of the most pivotal players in the second season finale. After worrying about the damning files all season, and saving a few from Tom's destruction in a very un-Roy moment of wanting to do the right thing, he ends up siding with Kendall and releasing the records. (Being able to inherit hundreds of millions from his grandfather again doesn't hurt, either).
Beware the Silly Ones: He's seen as a harmless goof by pretty much everyone and such a view is not unjustified, but he regularly shows he's smarter and craftier than he appears. Matsson of all people is the one who notices and lampshades this.
Big Little Brother: He's a cousin rather than a brother to the Roy children, but the trope is played straight otherwise: he is the youngest of the main characters and also the tallest, at 6'7''.
Big Ol' Eyebrows: He's got 'em.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Compared to the sociopathic Roys, he's a sweet kid — but he's not above deceit, blackmail and milking his extended family for money.
Blackmail: He turns out to have quite a talent for this. He successfully uses it on not only Tom, repeatedly, but also on multiple other characters who should be smart enough to plan for it but fail to because Greg is just so below their radar that they never think he'd have the capacity to manipulate them.
Bully and Wimp Pairing: With Tom, where Greg is the wimp. Even though Tom abuses his authority over Greg, the two are often a united front thanks to their shared outsider status within the family.
Butt-Monkey: Nobody really hates him, but no one really cares about him, either, not helped by his slow and unimpressive demeanor. Tom also frequently has him doing embarrassing dirty work, such as forcing him to shred sensitive documents after Greg had already driven twelve agonizing hours to get his belligerent grandfather to Thanksgiving dinner.
Card-Carrying Villain: Of a sort. He eagerly says that he "doesn't care" about others, calls himself "disgusting" and other negative attributes with glee, and mocks the notion that he needs or wants a soul in comparison to power.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: It doesn't matter who it is or what he has to do, Greg can and will betray anyone at any given time if it serves his interests. By Season 4, he has—in one fashion or another—both benefited and screwed over most of the main cast with his double-dealing.
Cloudcuckoolander: Has a tendency to wander off into strange thoughts. When in a panic room in the second season, he becomes increasingly anxious of the room's design, thinking that antagonists could fit an "attack child" through a window.
Commonality Connection: His outsider status saddles him with the company of Tom, another Social Climber within the Roy extended family.
Corrupt the Cutie: Tom drags Greg into the cruise crimes conspiracy, effectively "infecting" Greg with the "virus" of being complicit in the cover-up. Greg then cements his own corruption by ratting Tom out to Gerri, effectively picking his own job security over Tom's desire to do the right thing.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Much like Tom, he seems harmlessly incompetent, but he's actually a very good schemer when the situation calls for it.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Of the underdog slacker hero. His character arc shows that it's impossible to keep pace (let alone succeed) in a cutthroat world without resorting to amoral behavior. While Greg initially tries to remain as morally pure as possible in the beginning of the series, he begins to openly embrace his bad side by the time Season 3 rolls around, which includes suing the charity his grandfather works for in an attempt to claim his inheritance, and callously dumping Comfry in favor of trying to get in with a wealthy Italian contessa. He also decides to accept a Deal with the Devil with Tom to remain with Waystar, noting that he doesn't have much use for a soul anyway, as he playfully mocks the fact.
Desperately Craves Affection: He is so touch-starved that at one point in Season Two he gets a haircut for the following reason:
Greg: I just wanted someone to touch my head, you know. Soothing.
Dirty Coward: Once Greg gets involved with the Roy family and their dealings, he does everything to try to remain on everyone's good side while still getting a piece of their wealth.
In general, Greg is terrified of losing everything he's gained while remaining with the Roys, and his manipulative actions in the later seasons begin to reflect that. Notably, he flip-flops on his handling of the cruise scandal no less than three times. First, he rats Tom out to Gerri after the former expresses his intention to come clean about everything, then he sides with Kendall in trying to take down Logan with the evidence he's been secretly sitting on, only to immediately defect back to Logan when he realizes that it's not pragmatic for him in the long run.
He also sleeps with a ditzy young woman in Logan's home, then confesses and lays the blame on her, leaving his unassuming date to be "dealt with" by Colin because he doesn’t want to see the outcome.
His The Dog Bites Back moment to Kerry in which he gets payback for her abuse after he was forced to tell her that she wouldn't be appearing on ATN due to her terrible audition comes across as this as well, since he only really starts doing so after Marcia has already emotionally destroyed the other woman. This just makes him seem like the kind of weasel who'll only kick people when they're down and after a bigger bully has already made sure it's safe to do so.
During the events of "America Decides", Greg is intimidated into submission by a vengeful Shiv, who threatens to screw him if he continues to prod her around under Tom's command. But when Kendall asks him about Shiv's dealings with Matsson, he is quick to leak it to him to spite her, even showing off a devious and smug Psychotic Smirk as he's leaving the meeting room to hammer it in.
Disappeared Dad: Greg's father is never seen and appears to be estranged from his son. Given his father's reputation among the family for being homosexual and promiscuous — Caroline's comments that he "slept with all the men in Sausalito" and Logan's similar snide jab in Season 4 — it's possible he was disinherited, or he simply abandoned the family to pursue his own life, whether hedonistic or not.
Disinherited Child: He's cut out of his grandfather's will in response to going around Ewan's back and looking for other help after realizing Ewan's friend wasn't looking out for his best interest with the hopes it will cause Greg to act more seriously. It backfires and just pushes him further into Logan's grasp.
The Dog Bites Back: He has several moments of this against people who think they can control him. One of the biggest examples is in "America Decides", where Shiv tries to bully, demean and threaten Greg into doing what she wants. Greg doesn't hesitate to screw her over, letting her see his devious smirk after the fact to let her know she fucked with the wrong person.
Dominance Through Furniture: Tom's tactics to assert his authority at ATN is making "human furniture" or "footstooling" his employees (putting his feet up on their backs). He does so to Jonah and tries to encourage Greg to join in. All the "normal" people in the room are horrified when it comes out that Tom does this in the Senate hearing.
Do Not Call Me "Paul": Played With. As he starts climbing the corporate ladder, he briefly tries to get his family to address him by his more dignified full name "Gregory", but it doesn't stick at all and he quickly gives up.
Dreaded Kids' Party Entertainer Job: He's introduced working as a mascot at a Waystar park, where he immediately gets accosted by multiple children who beat the shit out of him and stress him so much that he vomits all over the suit.
Drink-Based Characterization: When Logan offers him a drink from his bar, Greg requests a rum and coke, a sweet, unsophisticated cocktail popular with beginning drinkers, establishing Greg as a Manchild. Logan doesn't even stock Coca-Cola and has to ask for one in a tone of obvious derision.
Dumbass Has a Point:
He's completely correct in his assertion that the so-called "safe room" he shares with Tom is "just a room" and not remotely safe. Though he slightly diffuses his moment of clarity by later suggesting that an "attack child" could slip through the window and presumably murder him.
While Greg didn't handle it well, his concern that Ewan's friend and attorney Roger Pugh wasn't going to be his best option was also well-founded as Roger and Ewan both seemed far more concerned with using the case as a chance to deliver an anti-capitalist diatribe than in Greg's well-being and neither seemed overly concerned with the prospect of Greg going to jail in the process.
Dumbass No More: Over the course of the first two seasons, he learns to leverage his knowledge of the Roys' secrets and his Beneath Notice status to advance and secure his position within Waystar.
Embarrassing Nickname: Greg the Egg.
Establishing Character Moment: In his first scenes he suffers a bad reaction to pot, gets fired from a low-level Goofy Suit job at an amusement park as a result, and tries to unsuccessfully blame the situation on a contact high. This establishes him as a slacker, a loser and a weasel.
Everyone Has Standards: Subverted. Although he claims that working for ATN is against his principles, his character arc over the series is about him gradually abandoning whatever principles he has.
Excellent Judge of Character: For all his fumbling and still trying to get in, he points out that Logan is paranoid and vindictive, Roman is a sex pest and Tom abuses everyone under him.
Extreme Doormat: Seriously, he can be pressed and guilted into doing just about anything. He develops out of this a bit as the series goes on (see Grew a Spine), but he still has his moments of utterly crumpling under serious pressure.
Faux Affably Evil: As the series goes on, he becomes more of this than genuinely affable. He keeps up the same downtrodden, polite and surface-level empathetic nature, but he slips in a lot of barbs, is truthfully uncaring about the people he interacts with, and loses the well-mannered attitude when he sees an opportunity to bully someone.
Greg: I just jackknife right in there and slit their throat.
Mattson: It must feel, afterwards, a little bit shitty, right?
Greg: Honestly, not really. HR says I'm the right guy for the job, because it looks like I care, but I don't.
Fish Out of Water: He sticks out like a sore thumb among the super-wealthy Roys, and not just because he's so tall.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Pretty much no one in the Roy family genuinely likes Greg as a person. Any attempts he makes at inserting himself into conversations get him ridiculed and shrugged off, and even when someone needs his help, it's usually asked for begrudgingly because they simply have that much distate for Greg. Even Tom seems to only value him as much as he can control and order him around.
Geek Physiques: Of the tall, gangly variety.
Generation Xerox: Greg's grandfather, Ewan Roy, is exceptionally tall at 6'7". Greg shares this height exactly.
Genius Ditz: His awkwardness is a social problem rather than an intellectual problem. He's not exactly brilliant, but he's cunning enough to take Tom by surprise and adapting more quickly to their eat-or-be-eaten world than Tom expects. He's also apparently the only family member who knows anything about computers.
Getting High on Their Own Supply: He deals drugs to those around him—early on, primarily Kendall—just as much as he dips into them himself.
Goofy Suit: He starts the series with a job as a mascot at one of Waystar-Royco's theme parks, and wears the requisite suit during his introductory scenes.
Grew a Spine: Part of his character arc is learning to stand up to Tom's abuse. Subverted when Tom becomes impressed with his newfound courage and takes him on as a confidant, which only makes Greg more of a weak-willed underling, such as when he's forced to pull Kerri from consideration as a news anchor himself after a cowardly Tom outsources the task to him.
Hidden Depths: He's a lot savvier and more suited to the cutthroat world of business than he seems. It's telling that Logan is nothing but cordial to Greg in the rare moments they get to talk, and he even offers to go up to bat for him when he explains his grandfather's plans to disinherit him in Season 2.
How They Treat the Help: In a direct contrast to Tom, he isn't an asshole towards service workers — a blink-and-you'll-miss-it moment reveals he spent the night before Shiv's wedding hanging out with Andrew, the waiter who Kendall later accidentally kills. At Kendall's birthday party, he also reassures a performer in the "compliment tunnel" that he's doing a good job, after Tom snipes at the man.
Important Haircut: Alongside his Significant Wardrobe Shift Greg's shaggy hair is cut down to a tidier look in season 3, and in season 4 it is even shorter and styled in a professional matter to show how he is much more baked into the world around him rather than just a fish out of water.
Inadequate Inheritor: Ewan Roy threatens to disinherit Greg if he continues to work for Logan.
Inhuman Resources: Has risen to this job by the end of the series, coldly laying off people and delivering the bad news. It doesn't seem to cost him a second of sleep.
Innocent Blue Eyes: Has big, mooning blue eyes, and is generally the most naive and good-hearted Roy (in comparison to the rest of the family).
In-Series Nickname: Greg the Egg, as well as (less embarrassingly) Cousin Greg; the latter is how both TV critics and fans normally refer to him as well.
Kick the Dog:
As early as Season 1, he betrays Tom's confidence by ratting him out to Gerri, completely derailing Tom's well-intentioned attempt at taking accountability for the cruise scandal just to save his own skin.
Ewan disinherits Greg after he's betrayed him for Logan not once but twice. Greg then ignores Ewan's genuine advice to grow up and first tries to sue his grandpa before settling for targeting the charity he's donating it to.
In Season 4, he repeatedly verbally humiliates and bullies other to get into the good graces of others, be it taunting Kerry's emotional breakdown after Logan's death, or threatening and belittling a sound mixer during the Living+ presentation.
Lack of Empathy: Not to the same extent as many in the Roy family, but by Season 4 he's become extraordinarily disinterested in the suffering of others. He dutifully, unflinchingly fires a very large group of people in a callous way, praises himself for a "nice" job on it, and later brags that such a task is fitting for him because while he looks like he cares about others, he doesn't.
Manchild: Prior to the start of the show, he's a twenty-something slacker with no marketable skills and no ability or desire to keep a job.
Momma's Boy: His mother is the one who gives him the idea to ingratiate himself to the Roys, and throughout Season 1 he consults her over the phone whenever he's faced with a challenge.
Morality Pet: Despite being a punching bag to everyone else, he functions as a strange one to Logan as time goes on as Logan comes to sincerely like Greg and sees potential in him, likely due to accurately seeing Greg is more cunning and ruthless than he seems at first glance.
Naïve Newcomer: Greg is Logan's grandnephew, but he grew up in a middle-class setting and had little interaction with Logan's side of the family until his mother sends him to New York, which lands him smack dab in the middle of the family drama.
Neet: At the beginning of the show he's a twentysomething slacker with no marketable skills or career prospects.
Odd Couple: He's in a Those Two Guys duo with Tom, with whom he shares a Commonality Connection as relative outsiders to the rest of the Roys.
Opportunistic Bastard: He is constantly hitching rides on the shoulders of more powerful people, first aligning himself with Tom and then ditching him for Kendall when the opportunity presents itself. He further continues to play all sides in whatever ways he can, consistently showing an aptitude for side-swapping.
Plucky Comic Relief: He is awkwardly amusing, and his storylines are more light-hearted than what the other characters get.
Professional Butt-Kisser: The only way he knows how to get ahead is being something of a suck-up and begging for jobs.
Rags to Riches: Greg is a jobless loser at the start of the show, though he comes from, at worst, an upper-middle-class home and has a filthy rich grandfather. Compared to the Roys, however, he's a pauper, so when he starts associated with them, it's a huge shift in his fortunes.
Sent Off to Work for Relatives: What lands Greg in the Roys' orbit in the beginning, and it actually happens twice in the pilot. He's gotten a job he doesn't deserve at one of the Canadian theme parks that the Roys run due to his name, but gets fired on the first day for smoking weed. His mom forcefully sends him off to New York to beg for his job back or get another one, which he does.
Significant Wardrobe Shift: Over the first two seasons, he starts wearing suits that actually fit him, showing that he's slowly becoming more comfortable in the world of the rich.
The Slacker: His work ethic is very, very bad.
Spock Speak: His speech is often slow and emotionless, and when nervous, he sometimes starts speaking in bizarrely formal terms.
Greg: I merely wish to answer in an affirmative fashion.
Gil Eavis: You can speak to us normally.
Greg: So I shall.
The Stoner: His first scene has him fired from a very low-level job due to him getting high right beforehand.
Stress Vomit: In his introductory scene, a bad combination of drugs and children pissing him off leads him to vomit all over his mascot outfit.
Surpassed the Teacher: By the end of Season 2, he seems to be besting his "mentor" Tom when it comes to playing the Roy game of one-upmanship and backstabbing.
Those Two Guys: He gradually forms this dynamic with Tom.
Token Good Teammate: Only inasmuch as he's not as terrible as Logan Roy and his brood, and seems to have a grasp on morals, however tenuous.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Greg spend most of the first three seasons coming across as a mostly decent guy, the occasional selfish moment aside, but gradually becomes more and more corrupted by his environment, as well as Tom's constant encouragement and coaching to abandon his (tenuous) principles in favor of chasing more money and power. Eventually, he takes a new, dark turn by trying to sue Ewan's charity of choice after losing his inheritance (entirely his own fault). By Season 4, he's become just as much of a self-serving Jerkass as the rest of the family, leveraging his cousin status for privileges and sex and generally acting far more entitled and snobbish.
Trademark Favorite Food: The Cajun chicken linguini at California Pizza Kitchen.
Wardrobe Flaw of Characterization: Lampshaded in-universe: he wears deck shoes to his first day at Waystar and is promptly chewed out by Tom for not knowing how to dress himself.
Wild Card: Of any major character, Greg is the most malleable in loyalties and arguably even the most self-serving, who can and will benefit both sides of a conflict if it serves his interests. He gathers intel and leaks it to friend and foe alike, compliments someone then insults them on the fly depending on who he's talking to, and he's generally shown to be a dangerous loose cannon who everyone looks down on, while truthfully having way more sway than anyone realizes until it's too late.
With Friends Like These...: He and Tom come to think of each other as friends, which doesn't stop the mutual wariness, deception and blackmailing.
Your Approval Fills Me with Shame: He successfully blackmails Tom in Season 2 and is not happy when Tom expresses his admiration of that.