Affably Evil: Despite being aware of (and sometimes complicit in) Logan's crimes, Marcia is far more polite and personable than him. Just don't piss her off.
Amicable Exes: Still cares about Logan even after he begins their separation, and claims they maintained a healthy (and perhaps still intimate) correspondence almost daily.
Badass Boast: She gives a coldly efficient one to Rhea.
"When I lose, the other one will generally lose an eye or a soul."
Beware the Nice Ones: Marcia is outwardly polite and pleasant, but cross her, and the consequences will be anything but pleasant (although still polite!) She won't hesitate to call you out, even if it's at your own wedding or at a business dinner in which your future is decided.
Commuting on a Bus: She is in theory there all the way through Season 2, but she doesn't go on many of the trips with the Roys, which result in her being out of the picture for longish periods of time.
Cool Old Lady: She is elegant, cunning and put-together, and can be absolutely terrifying when she needs to bring someone to her heel.
Dark Mistress: She's just as interested as Logan in framing the dead caterer as a thief so Logan can be freed of suspicion of his death.
Female Misogynist: She calls Shiv a spoiled slut right after her stepdaughter finds out about cruises, and the increasingly likely possibility that Logan had taken part in the abuse.
Foreign-Language Tirade: When delivering a "The Reason You Suck" Speech to Shiv, Marcia occasionally lapses into her native French.
Hypocrite: A rare moment of someone putting Marcia in her place comes when Marcia makes one snide comment too many about "how far [Willa] has come" after she marries Connor, only for Willa to coolly retort "Yeah, look at us both" — reminding Marcia that, for all her airs and graces, she is in many ways just as much a Gold Digger as Willa is and is in no real position to look down her nose. Marcia can only accept the comeback with silent fuming.
Morality Pet: To Logan Roy. He can't summon respect or affection for any of his offspring, but he does seem to genuinely love Marcia.
Mysterious Past: When Shiv investigates her background, she doesn't find any information about her prior to when she was 31. In the second season she outright states that even if given a year, she wouldn't have enough time to tell you all about her past.
No Sense of Personal Space: Knowing Kendall’s secret of accidentally killing the waiter and it being covered up, she tells him he’s a nice boy and that Misery Builds Character while holding him in place.
Parenting the Husband: She has her limits, mostly at Logan treating her like one of the children, but will look after him in his more scatterbrained moments and sometimes defends him like he’s a child who has no clue what he’s doing.
Put on a Bus: She's prone to long absences on the show due to becoming Out of Focus. Early in season 4, Kerry snarks that Marcia is "in Milan, shopping... forever," though it doesn't last.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: She gives a pretty damn devastating one to Shiv in the penultimate episode of the first season, calling her spoiled and entitled as she actively works against the one man who gave her the privilege to do so.
Silk Hiding Steel: Marcia is extremely polite, fairly quiet, and appears much more put together than the Roy kids' mother Caroline. But if even Logan messes with her, she is willing to do some serious damage.
Took a Level in Kindness: Marcia is nothing but cruel to Kerry at Logan's wake, callously kicking her out and mocking her social status. Several episodes later, at Logan's funeral, when Caroline brings Kerry up to the front with the all of the other wives and mistresses, she takes Kerry's hand as she weeps, seeming to realize now that Logan's dead, it doesn't matter anymore.
Undying Loyalty: She has her own problems with Logan, and doesn't appreciate being treated like his children, but is far more likely to be on his side and decry them as ungrateful brats.
Wicked Stepmother: The siblings consider her this, seeing her as a gold digger who's entrapped Logan, especially when she refuses to let them see Logan while he's recovering from his stroke (though Shiv finds out the hard way that she has good reason for this). This is downplayed as the series progresses, as while she's certainly no saint herself, Marcia is usually fairly amiable and welcoming to the Roy siblings, so long as they reciprocate her courteousness.
Woman Scorned:
She is not happy about being sidelined during the second season and doesn't hesitate to let Logan know it.
At Logan's wake she takes the highest pleasure to absolutely eviscerate his young mistress, Kerry. However, by the time Logan's funeral rolls around, she appears to have softened towards her.