Age-Gap Romance: It's never brought up but he seems to be significantly older than Shiv if their actors' ages are any indication (Matthew McFayden is fourteen years older than Sarah Snook).
Ambiguously Bi: He shows no interest in any other woman except Shiv and no men... except he's very, very attached to Greg. The first thing he does when he meets him is try to bully him, asking if he'd kiss him, and he's very jealous when Greg moves in with Kendall. In Season 3, he repeatedly compares their relationship to that of Nero and Sporusnote , celebrates the news that he's not going to prison for the cruise scandal by kissing Greg's forehead, and acts unhappy and jealous when Greg wants to ask out Comfrey. His invitation to join Logan against the siblings, betraying his wife Shiv, in the finale of Season 3 is also framed more like a marriage proposal than anything, including the fact that he addresses Greg as "Sporus."
Anti-Mentor: Played with. He advises his subordinate Greg not to trust anyone (a helpful tip in the cutthroat business world) but doesn't disclose the latter's meeting with Michelle Pantsil, a secret only he was trusted with. Additionally, he uses one of his employees as a physical footstool and successfully encourages a hesitant Greg to join him.
Anti-Villain: He's sleaze like most of the cast, but out of everyone Tom shows the most signs of genuine kindness and morality. It's a relative thing and he's just as capable of mindless cruelty, but he's still relatively more altruistic and empathetic than most of the Roys's inner circle, albeit with it heavily dampened by his weaselly and self-serving personality.
Arson, Murder, and Admiration: Responds this way when he realizes that Greg is blackmailing him, using crucial documents that could land him in prison against him. He's genuinely proud that he's showing initiative and savvy, even going so far as to encourage him by offering Greg more than he is demanding.
At Least I Admit It: He openly says that being rich is freaking awesome, and he's not going to pretend he doesn't love every second of it or deny himself any luxuries—and, as he says to Shiv, all the rest of them share his lust for money, so none of them have the right to judge him for it.
Tom: I like nice things. I do. If you think that’s shallow, why don’t you throw out all your stuff for love?
Awful Wedded Life: For as much as they seem to care about each other at times, Tom and Shiv's marriage is marred with neglect, abuse, and passive-aggressiveness from both parties.
The Baby Trap: Because of his fear of going to prison, he’s suddenly obsessed with Shiv’s periods. She’s not happy when she figures this out, despite his insistence that it’s a nice thing and not just treating her as a host chamber.
Bridezilla: He gets really, really into figuring out the details of the wedding, and is horrible towards the wedding planner.
Tom: Not to be a groomzilla, but...
Brutal Honesty: During his vicious fight with Shiv in "Tailgate Party", he delivers multiple truth bombs about her attitude, mental state, and, most harshly, his belief that she is unfit for motherhood.
Bully and Wimp Pairing: With Greg, where Tom is the bully. Even though Tom likes to assert his dominance over Greg, he does care for him, and the two often stick together thanks to their shared outsider status within the family.
Butt-Monkey: To the Roys; he is below everyone except Greg in the family pecking order.
Camp Straight: A (presumably straight) sneering metrosexual with a fondness for dress balls and pastel colors.
Cloudcuckoolander: He tries to hide it, but Tom is a weird man, who’ll pepper lines like “bad news about my hymen” in morning breakfast conversation.
The Cobbler's Children Have No Shoes: It's implied that the side of Tom that plays psychosexual mind games with Greg would be more appealing to Shiv, with the irony being that it's the side of him that never comes out in front of her, causing her to look at him as a boring drip of a husband leading to much of their marital conflict. This is, basically, proven correct to a point throughout Season 4. Tom begins behaving far more aggressively, explicitly cruel in his quest for power, and Shiv is so infatuated by his ambition that their romance is reignited. Briefly.
Commonality Connection: He and Greg are both outsiders among the Roys.
The Confidant: Shiv was a traumatised mess (she still is, but hides it better) when she met Tom, and he’s the only one - aside from Logan who “sees everything” - who knows some personal stuff she’s told him.
Conspicuous Consumption: He thinks this is the best way to look rich, when in reality such behavior only underscores the fact that he's "new money".
Crazy Jealous Guy: Shiv admits she’s cheating on him, so his threat to break Nate’s legs is sort of justified, but he also throws water bottles at Greg for attempting to break away from him.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Much like his underling Greg, he seems harmlessly incompetent, but he's a very good schemer when his back is against the wall. The Season 3 finale rams this home when he outdoes the rest of the Roy children and throws in with Logan, pulling off a heavy victory for himself, even if temporary. And then the show ends with Tom becoming the CEO, albeit subservient to Matsson.
Damned by Faint Praise: Shiv is very obviously settling for him, as her only reason for being with him is that he's "a good guy". Even on their wedding day, she only says, "You're a great guy, and I like hanging out with you," in comparison to Tom, who is so overwhelmed by his love for her that he cuts his speech short.
Deadpan Snarker: Usually has a snide remark at the ready in response to the frequently inane situations he finds himself in, with Greg usually taking the brunt of his barbs.
Dirty Coward: When there’s a shooter, he pushes a woman out of the way because “executives are coming through!”
The Dog Bites Back: While he allows himself to be run roughshod by the entire Roy family, he has his limits - notably snapping back at and humiliating Shiv's lover at their wedding reception before having him leave the premises. He becomes more tired of Shiv treating him like a pawn in Season 2, even telling her to fuck off when she goes too far mocking him during a dinner. By the season finale, he's had enough with Shiv's antics and even tells her he's considering leaving her. Taken even further in the Season 3 finale when he outright betrays Shiv by warning Logan of her, Kendall, and Roman's plan to block the sale of the company. Season 4 sees Tom take Matsson's side in the GoJo deal, ultimately taking over as the new Waystar CEO.
Dogged Nice Guy: He behaves this way around the Roys, but takes out his insecurities in an ugly way on anyone who is beneath him in standing.
The Dragon: He gets in Logan's good graces in Season 4 and becomes his most trusted crony, speaking on his behalf in at least one negotiation. This does not last, as Logan dies early on in the season. Though Tom finds his way back into this position under Matsson in the series finale by being his puppet CEO.
Drunk with Power: He loves the thought of being able to fire fifty people from ATN, and being able to use people as human furniture.
Dude, Where's My Reward?: Tom is a mirror to Roman in that they both think they can play the being kicked game until it stops and they can be rewarded. But while Roman wants love and a family who can process emotions like normal people, Tom’s angle is getting more power.
Dumbass Has a Point: He brings up early on that Logan will do the same to Shiv what he did to Kendall, play with her and get bored once she’s in, and while he can’t connect the dots that Logan is like that with everyone, that ends up exactly what happens.
Effeminate Misogynistic Guy: His malewife status only goes so far, and his sexist side comes out in season three (wanting to use Shiv as an incubator, feeling emasculated by her being his boss, and wanting to show her who the “man” is).
Emasculated Cuckold: Kendall and Roman both taunt him (though it’s just as much about humiliating their sister) on how likely it is that Shiv will fuck other men when he’s going to jail.
Entitled to Have You: Pissed off about Shiv’s wanting to have an open marriage, he resorts to Tantrum Throwing when Greg wants to “see other people”... professionally.
Everyone Has Standards:
He makes clear to Greg that he doesn't actually believe any of ATN's right-wing rhetoric and sees it simply as a stepping stone. He's also visibly uncomfortable when Mark Ravenhead heavily implies that he's a Nazi sympathizer and Holocaust denier.
Tom: Have you ever read Mein Kampf?
Mark Ravenhead: Ehhhh, yeahhhh? Couple times, I guess.
Tom: Couple times? Were there easter eggs in there you didn't get the first time?
As much as he tries to overlook Logan's clear abuse of his kids, he looks genuinely disturbed at how he (accidentally) slaps Roman and barely seems to even acknowledge it. He's also horrified at him harming Iverson during the thanksgiving dinner.
Extreme Doormat: He meekly accepts and shoulders much of the criticism that the Roys place upon him, and is especially cowed by Shiv. By the end of season 2, he's finally starting to push back a little.
Fall Guy: Though at first reluctant, he eventually clenches his teeth and offers himself up as a sacrificial lion to go to prison in order to save Waystar. He's doing it in the hope it will lead to greater respect and power in the future, but he's still utterly terrified by the prospect and rejoices when he manages to avoid prison time.
Family Versus Career: He misses Logan's funeral for work at Waystar. Matsson is impressed with Tom when he learns this, thus setting the stage for him crowning Tom CEO in the series finale.
Flipping the Table: An unusual example. After he finds out he's likely not going to prison, he violently overturns Greg's desk in joy, not anger.
Girl-on-Girl is Hot: Averted. When Shiv arranges a threesome with another woman, he's not enthusiastic.
Gold Digger: A complex take. Tom obviously comes from a significantly less privileged background than the Roys and only earned his place at the company due to his relationship with Shiv. He absolutely loves being rich and revels in his power over others that his position gives him. However, it's also clear that he does genuinely love Shiv. As the series progresses, however, he gradually chafes more and more over Shiv's increasingly disrespectful behavior toward him. A major plot point in the latter parts of the series has Tom trying to figure out how much of his wealth and influence he'll retain if he were to divorce Shiv.
Henpecked Husband: He is henpecked hard even before he marries Shiv.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: Definitely has shades of this with Greg, though his behavior throws into question just how "heterosexual" his attachment to Greg is.
Homoerotic Subtext: Tom's aggression toward Greg is often sexually charged. While this isn't unusual behavior for straight men in a juvenile or college fraternity sense, Tom is somewhat obsessed with Greg in ways he'd clearly rather deny. This starts nearly climbing out of subtext in Season 3. Most notably, he tells Greg the story of Nero and his lover Sporus out of nowhere, then immediately tries to start a physical playfight (despite Greg's resistance), and later refers to Greg as Sporus while making an intimate business proposal in romantic lighting (as two waiters in the background snap each other's rears with napkins).
How They Treat the Help: Inverted. Tom's internal scumbag sadist shows through his mild facade whenever he's given power over others.
Hypocrite: Tom is uncomfortable with Ravenhead’s obvious fascist views, but has a whole conversation with Shiv defending him, using all the usual excuses like “who wasn’t salty when they were twenty one”/”your dad likes him”/”fascism is a loaded word”.
I Fight for the Strongest Side!: Tom does know on some level that Logan is abusive, even making incest jokes about it, but as he tells Kendall, he’s seen him get fucked over and over, and - well - he’s with the fucker.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: The man uses people as human furniture to try and get over how emasculated Shiv and the other Roys make him feel. Noted by Greg early on, explaining to Ewan why Tom insulted him so much with "he's scared and lonely".
It's All About Me: Although Tom tries to put up a facade of working as a husband-wife team with Shiv while working for Waystar, it's clear that he only really cares about himself.
When Shiv is offered the the title of CEO of Waystar in Season 2, Tom barely tries to feign excitement and explicitly notes that he was hoping he would get the job instead. He's also deluded enough to think that he was the target when a shooter attacks the building in "Safe Room", due to his status as head of ATN.
Later on in Season 3, he's constantly fearmongering about the idea of going to prison, while also trying to convince Shiv to have a baby with him, but only wants it so that a part of him will always be with Shiv if he's incarcerated, much to her complete disgust.
Taken up to eleven by the Season 3 finale, where he works with Logan to backstab the main Roy siblings (and by extension, his own wife) to get himself and Greg top positions in Waystar before it's successfully merged with Matsson's company.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold:
Though he can be very abrasive, self-serving and bullying, he really does care for Shiv and wants to be part of the family, and is genuinely hurt when he realizes she's cheating on him and refuses to admit it. Even Logan tells Shiv he's a good man.
Despite his abuse, he also grows to care for Greg's well-being. In what is Tom's most selfless act on the show, he protects Greg (at actual detriment to his own position in the family) from Logan's wrath after Greg inadvertently betrays his great-uncle to a biographer writing a tell-all book. In Season 3, when Greg asks Tom if he would absorb his personal part of the blame in the cruise papers scandal for him since it seemed as though Tom would be going to prison anyways, Tom simply agrees to, with nothing to suggest he has ulterior motives in doing this for Greg. Even Greg is surprised. When Tom ascends to become Waystar's CEO in the finale, he opts to bring Greg along with him in a position of power, noting that while Mattson may have issues with Greg, Tom is aware enough of Greg's loyalty to him and rewards him for it.
Greg: No quid pro quo? Just… that's… that’s incredibly kind of you.
He chooses to learn about Waystar's illegal activities — when not doing so would have kept him off the hook in a potential scandal — and is then the only character who contemplates doing "the right thing" and making the information public. Also, in marked contrast to Shiv, he is backing Sanderesque presidential candidate Gil Eavis out of idealism.
"Just Joking" Justification: Tom's modus operandi is to pretend that he's joking because he struggles with his own emotions and emotional outbursts, especially with Greg and Shiv, especially as she's much more hard-nosed than him in general.
Kick the Dog: When he tasks Greg with firing dozens of ATN employees over video call, Tom smugly mocks the people's upset reactions and inevitable tears for a cheap laugh.
Large and in Charge: Inverted. He's the tallest character in the show after Greg but the two are at the bottom of the pecking order and are regularly reminded of that fact.
Large Ham: He can be quite over the top when he wants to be, screaming and spouting off downright insane statements when trying to assert dominance in a conversation or let off some steam when he's stressed.
Like a Son to Me: In “Retired Janitors of Idaho”, a piss-mad Logan calls him “son” and asks him to take him to the bathroom. It’s assumed that Logan thinks he’s Kendall, but Tom still takes the opportunity with both hands.
Love Forgives All but Lust: Downplayed. Throughout Season 1, Tom worships Shiv. While it is also accompanied by her realization that she would like to take over Waystar-Royco which pushes Tom further from her, he is deeply wounded that she asked for an open marriage on their wedding night, and when he finally vents how he really feels to Shiv for once, he emphasizes that, with the implication that was when she went too far with him.
Manchild: Tom tries very hard to come across as a suave professional, but his natural immaturity ends up coming through a lot, whether in his trying way too hard to prove he belongs to the ultra-wealthy elites or his tendency to throw tantrums when things don't go his way.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: Where Shiv is ruthless and calculating, he is, at heart, soft and sentimental. He also likes pastel colors, and his ultimate childhood dream was to attend a fancy ball.
Mean Boss: Greg mentioning that Tom can be abusive professionally is the first step in him getting some respect from Logan.
Minnesota Nice: He grew up in St. Paul and is saddled with the requisite Midwestern politeness, with a lot of his jabs cloaked in passive aggression (although he does let loose with Greg). His behavior is obviously passed down from his parents, who brush off apologies for being late to pick them up at the airport by saying that they had "great fun" sitting around for hours.
Mirror Character: He's more like Logan than Shiv knows about, showing off his darker side by abusing Greg, and puts his hands on her shoulders after betraying her like her dad does in the credits.
Morality Pet: He's not a good person at all, but he and Shiv have a dog called Mondale, and Tom is the only one affectionate to it.
My Girl Is Not a Slut: He grudgingly accepts Shiv's offer of an open marriage, but that doesn’t mean he wants to hear any of her past experiences.
Not-So-Harmless Villain: While "villain" is a bit extreme since most everyone in the show is morally reprehensible in one way or the other, Tom still rises from a complete Butt-Monkey barely scraping by early on, to a genuine rival to the Roy kids in Season 4 after his betrayal at the end of Season 3. By the end of Season 4, he has outmaneuvered them all through sheer butt-kissing, slimy double-dealing and opportunism to become the new power at WayStar.
Not with Them for the Money: Zig-zagged; he's a Social Climber and very obviously enamored with the Roy wealth, but his feelings for Shiv are genuine. In Season 4 he very blatantly spells out that a big part of his attraction towards her was for power and money, and that while he sincerely cares for her, he still values those material things almost as much.
Odd Couple: He's in a Those Two Guys duo with Greg, as both are relative outsiders to the rest of the Roys.
Original Position Fallacy: He's on neither Kendall's nor Shiv’s side because he’s seen them get fucked repeatedly, but assumes the best place to be is on the side of the person doing the fucking, thinking it won't be him next.
Papa Wolf: Immediately checks up on Kendall's son after Logan unintentionally harms him during the Thanksgiving dinner, which is noticeable given Kendall himself acts completely submissive in the same scene and doesn't do the same.
Pet the Dog:
Only in a series like Succession could the fondness that Tom feels for Greg over their abusive relationship come across as humanizing.
When Logan dies, Tom is desperately doing his best to console the Roy kids (mostly Shiv), offer them a chance to final goodbyes, and using overall extremely kind, empathetic language throughout the situation. Despite his current estrangement from Shiv, Tom shows that he is capable of putting that aside to give the kids some closure.
Plausible Deniability: Tom runs into this when a key member of his staff retires and reveals that he's been covering up extremely illegal activities by the company. Tom has to choose whether to learn about the activities so he can keep them covered up, or to avoid learning about them so he has plausible deniability when they come to light. He ultimately chooses to learn about them...and promptly involves Greg in the whole mess as well.
Power of Trust: Zig-zagged. When asking Greg to go to the office on Thanksgiving, he claims that he wants to be able to trust Greg and vice versa. Come Season 2's "Hunting", he goes back on his word and warns Greg to trust no one and that even he can only be trusted to a certain extent. Despite this, he keeps Greg's meeting with author Michelle Pantsil a secret.
Professional Butt-Kisser:
His very first scene is wanting to get in good with Logan, and that never stops even when he’s horrified about what goes on in the company.
This pattern continues in Season 4 with Matsson, as Tom continues to be submissive to Matsson even as the latter is openly talking about wanting to fuck Tom's wife to his face as a Secret Test of Character. It all finally pays off for Tom in the series finale, when Matsson makes him CEO of Waystar.
Pungeon Master: His best-known line might just be "You can't make a Tomlette without breaking some Greggs".
Puppet King: Tom ends up with Waystar in the end, but it's clear this comes with Matsson's strings attached.
Pyrrhic Victory: Tom ends up getting what he theoretically wanted at the beginning of Season 1: he's married to Shiv, he has the pick of jobs...and Shiv ends up chipping away at his love for her to the point where he considers leaving her, and he's deeply unhappy with the knowledge he's gained about Waystar.
In the series finale, Tom is made CEO of Waystar. Hooray! Except it becomes clear right away that he is only being kept in the position to be a lackey for Matsson who accurately sees Tom as someone he can push around who has almost no real authority. He also reunites with Shiv but it becomes clear neither wants to be in the marriage but feel obligated.
Rags to Riches: Not "rags" exactly, given his middle-class background, but Tom is currently in a family with billions of dollars to its name, and often feels uncomfortable due to the vast differences in his and Shiv's upbringings.
Rank Up: A plot point, as his ascension up the corporate ladder early in the series (to Head of Cruises) saddles him with the highly unwelcome knowledge of Waystar's crime coverups.
The Resenter:
He’s aware of the Incest Subtext between Logan and Kendall, and he can be seen in the background when they interact looking jealous, so he takes the opportunity in season three to be a replacement, Kendall identifying with it being no fun being the last eunuch in the forbidden city, promising Logan he won’t “wriggle”, and helping piss-mad Logan to the bathroom, being called “son” while his hand is on the man’s dick.
He's also resentful towards Shiv for her own ambition and for her manipulation of him.
The Scapegoat: It becomes apparent that Logan (and the Waystar-Royco board) plan on Tom being this for the cruise ship scandal. The only reason it doesn't happen is that Shiv finally stands up for him.
Sex God: According to Shiv's text messages, he's actually a very skilled and selfless lover. The Sex with the Ex she has with him is described as "orgasm Olympics" and she jokes she "lost count" of how many orgasms he gave her in a single night.
Silly Rabbit, Idealism Is for Kids!: When Greg expresses discomfort with ATN, he yells at him to man up and act like he doesn’t have any principles.
Slimeball: Overtly sycophantic, sneaky, manipulative, and not as sophisticated as he thinks he is.
Social Climber: Shiv's ex notes that he's some nobody from the Midwest, and he's very interested in climbing up the ladder of the company and even considers taking Shiv's last name for reasons obviously unrelated to equality (though he is marrying for love).
So Proud of You: He is actually impressed with Greg when the latter blackmails him, although Greg is not happy with this reaction.
Stepford Smiler: It's made repeatedly clear that he isn't as happy in his marriage to Shiv as he likes to seem and is deeply resentful of her treatment of him as an afterthought. He admits to Greg, after the bottle throwing and learning that the shot was a suicide, that he also has a lot of self-loathing.
The Svengali: Attempts to be this to Greg, taking him under his wing in both business and social mentorship, but mainly keeping him around as a resource to exploit for his own goals. However, he does at times seem to be genuinely misguided in thinking that he's also helping Greg out by doing this.
Sympathetic Adulterer: Shiv treats him badly, so even though he treats Greg badly too, the psychosexual mind games mixed with care aren’t seen as awful as they could be.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: He's got the looks for this (fitting as his actor once played Mr Darcy who was this trope incarnate), though his personality is the opposite of what this trope usually entails.
Tantrum Throwing: When Greg wants to break up with him (professionally), Tom takes it very badly, first tearing up and then pelting Greg with water bottles while shouting at him.
Took a Level in Jerkass: He becomes increasingly cruel and merciless as he ingratiates himself with Logan, especially in regard to Shiv, who he treats more like property that he has ownership of because she's carrying his baby and blames for all his failings just because she left him. He cruelly tells her that she's incapable of love, unfit for motherhood, and too 'damaged' while she's pregnant.
Trapped in Villainy: Once he learns about the company's dark secrets, Tom's first instinct is to come clean about the situation as a way of producing reform while saving the company's reputation. He is stopped, however, once it becomes clear to him that elements within the Roys' inner circle aim to shut down the possibility, and the second season has him frantically scrubbing any trace of evidence about it while actively helping the cover-up.
Wardrobe Flaw of Characterization: Much like his Conspicuous Consumption tendencies, Tom's wardrobe is too try-hard — his shoes are too shiny, and his ties match his pocket squares. The Roys insult him by mocking his boxy suits and calling him "a divorce attorney from the Twin Cities."
Who's Laughing Now?: Tom to Shiv's lover at his wedding. After a season of the latter mocking him both behind his back and in front of it, Tom takes no little pleasure in utterly humiliating him at the reception before having him escorted out.
With Friends Like These...: He and Greg come to think of each other as friends, which doesn't stop the mutual wariness, deception and blackmailing.
Wolf in Sheep's Clothing: While he does care about Greg, his asshole side comes out when Shiv and the other Roys leave, and he uses human furniture to make up for his own inadequacies.
Wounded Gazelle Gambit: Prostrates himself in front of Logan, offering to be the Fall Guy who won’t wriggle like Kendall did, so Logan will appreciate it and take care of him.
Wrong Assumption: On some level he knows that his wife and her brothers are abused, but on another he can’t really comprehend it, laughing hysterically when Caroline throws another insult at Shiv, thinking it’s just a joke and not an abusive mother.
Yes-Man: After Logan blames Shiv for being in on the vote of no confidence plan (she wasn’t) and apparently talks to her worse than normal, Tom still asks her if she’s okay with him sucking up to her father. He gets into trouble with Cyd for assuming she’s the same, and will just say whatever Logan thinks.