The Ace: Regularly schools a group of Ferengi at Tongo (a Ferengi game), knows more about Klingon culture than most Klingons, to the point where she can teach Klingon musicians Klingon songs, is an excellent chess player who has set the record for four different scientific fields. Of course, being the combination of a host and a symbiote that is Really 700 Years Old, Dax has had a lot of time to acquire these skills... But setting the record for the four different scientific fields, among other things, was Jadzia's accomplishment even before joining with the Dax Symbiote.
Ace Pilot: Not as pronounced as Sulu or Tom Paris, but she usually serves as the Defiant's helmsman and her piloting helps get the crew out of a couple scrapes. Doubly impressive as she still retains her blue uniform.
Action Girl: She's handy with bat'leths, phasers, and piloting consoles.
Affectionate Nickname: Sisko calls her "Old Man", the same nickname he gave to her predecessor Curzon.
Battle Couple: With Worf.
Been There, Shaped History: In-universe version. The Dax symbiont has fought alongside the likes of Kang, Kor, and Koloth; negotiated the Khitomer Accords to usher in peace between the Federation and Klingons; and even (gulp!)...dated Bones McCoy in college.
Brainy Brunette: The station's science officer who earned Premier Distinctions in four fields of study all before she was joined with the Dax symbiont.
Cannot Keep a Secret: A running joke is that Jadzia is completely incapable of keeping information to herself. When Sisko asks how a person knows something, the response is "You told Jadzia."
The Casanova: Explains to Bashir that she would rather just have sex freely instead of having feelings for someone, and is turned off by his panting puppy chasing.
Characterization Marches On: Jadzia was originally serene and almost aloof due to her (kind of) great age. They retooled the character in Season 2 to make her lively, adventurous, and realistically flawed.
Character Shilling: An unusual variant since Dax is a joined Trill, but Jadzia is highly prone to talking about what Curzon Dax would do. And to a much greater degree, when Jadzia encounters someone who knew Curzon, they quite often sing praises about what a great man he was.
The Consigliere: To Sisko. It helps that Dax has been knocking about for a long while, and knows the attitudes of Starfleet's various adversaries.
Cool Old Guy: Her personality after season 1. She just happens to have the body of a young, beautiful woman.
Cultured Badass: She can speak Klingon, drink any Klingon under the table, handle a Bat-leth with ease, beat Ferengi at Tongo (their variation of poker), and imitate a Romulan with flawless disdain, just to name a few. Admittedly, she still hasn't solved an Altonian brain teaser after 160 years. Bashir tried it, and caused the game to crash immediately.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: A good indicator on where the line between symbiont and host blurs happens when Sirella shows up, takes one look at Jadzia and decides there's no way in Sto-vo-Kor this jumped up twerp's getting in her house. Jadzia throws a fit in private about the disrespect she's being shown, until Sisko lays down the truth: Dax did all those negotiations with the Klingons but Jadzia didn't, and therefore Jadzia Dax will still have to make nice to Sirella if she wants to marry Worf.
Enemy Within: Joran Dax, the most unstable of her past personalities.
Fusion Dance: Relationship of Dax and its hosts are like that, in addition to being The Nth Doctor of Dax. Personality is explicitly mix of personality of symbiont, its current host and little bit of previous hosts too.
The Gadfly: Dax has a sadistic streak and takes great pleasure in causing chaos in Odo's perfectly-organized quarters by moving furniture just a hair out of alignment. In general, she loves pushing the buttons of people she thinks are wound too tight. Especially Worf.
Gallows Humor: One unfortunate habit of this Dax host (possibly inherited from Curzon) was cracking wise whenever death was on the horizon. And it wasn't Jadzia's usual rapier wit, either. We're talking about leaden, So Unfunny, It's Funny one-liners that would embarrass even Data.
Sisko: (fuming) Dax, maybe you haven't noticed, but no one's laughing.
Genius Bruiser: Wisdom and knowledge of eight lifetimes, science officer, and fights like a Klingon.
Green-Skinned Space Babe: Well, spotted skin, but still a slightly different and dripping hot Human Alien in true Star Trek tradition.
Happily Married: To Worf, until her Jadzia host died.
Honest Advisor: To Ben. She also dumps Quark's friendship after he becomes an arms dealer, although she is genuinely outraged in that instance.
Icy Blue Eyes
Immortal Immaturity: The Dax symbiont is particularly rowdy. This is proven by Jadzia's former personality before her joining: a bookish Shrinking Violet.
Jem'Hadar: Few Jem'Hadar live that long. If we reach twenty, we're considered honored elders. (leans in) How old are you?
Dax: I stopped counting at 300.
Jem'Hadar: (dumbfounded) You don't look it.
This is generally ignored by her associates, although Sisko dared to remind Jadzia of her age during a heated argument about Worf. Dax did not like it, but she could not refute it either.
Interspecies Romance: With Worf.
Intimate Marks: Yes, the spots really do go all the way down.
Killed Off for Real: Subverted as the Dax symbiont, complete with Jadzia's mind, personality, and memories as host, passes on to Ezri, despite the fact that Jadzia is still dead, in purely physical terms.
The Knights Who Say "Squee!":
A bit of a Spock fangirl. One glimpse of him in the flesh, and she's ready to toss the Temporal Prime Directive out the airlock, hint hint. Sisko has to drag her away by the arm.
While we're on the subject, she did date Dr. McCoy when she was in college (in her previous host who was a gymnast). While not squeeing about it, she fondly recalled that he had "the hands of a surgeon".
The Lad-ette: Curzon drank too much, slept too late and was always on the prowl, and it's not too long before Jadzia follows suit. She also enjoys playing Tongo with Quark and his hard-drinking gambler friends. As her mother-in-law discovered the hard way, Dax throws a mean right hook.
There were early attempts at making Dax reserved and wise, but it never stuck. After one season, Ira Behr realized the 'old soul' angle wasn't working out; the character was gradually retooled into a sporty, quasi-androgynous commando, switching gender roles depending on the setting. She can be quite butch when the situation calls for it, but she's wickedly girlish in private.
Lady of War: An elegant and graceful fighter who knows Klingon martial arts and has a Bat'leth.
Living Forever Is Awesome: She sees it as her duty to give the Dax symbiont an interesting life and often draws on the things she's learned over the centuries, whether it's engineering or parental advice.
Meaningful Name: An unintentional example (or is it?). Jadzia happens to be a diminutive form of an actual Polish feminine given name Jadwiga — which originated from old German name Hedwig. The latter name, it turn, is compounded from words hadu ("battle") and wig ("fight"). It also belonged to the first female king of Poland. Therefore, Jadzia would be affectionate name for a woman known for her combat prowess and many victories in battle. Which, in another interesting coincidence, suits Dax quite well.
Morality Chain: Sisko commented that Dax probably saved his career more than once, usually by bailing him out of trouble or stopping him from wringing someone's neck.
Dax always walked a fine line between enjoying the time she spends with Quark and finding his business activities a bit tasteless, but he crosses the line in "Business As Usual" by profiteering from war. Dax hits the nail on the head when she asks Quark how he feels about his newfound profession, because he immediately starts spilling excuses.
Ms. Fanservice: Let's see: tall, leggy, got to wear the legendary Starfleet miniskirt in "Trials and Tribble-ations", got a swimsuit scene in the Beach Episode, got the first lesbian kiss in Star Trek history in "Rejoined", had her clone verbatim described as a "sex kitten" in the description of an early episode...the trope fits her like a glove.
No Guy Wants to Be Chased: Part of the problem with courting Dax is that she's been a man herself numerous times. She expresses zero interest in the panting, tail-wagging Bashir, and later admits that he might've had more success with her if he hadn't been so eager.
The Nth Doctor: The eighth host of Dax.
Obnoxious In-Laws: Martok is more agreeable, but his wife is a harridan. Jadzia has been through so many wedding ceremonies in her lifetimes she is happy to dump all the minutiae on Worf whilst she parties the night away with her friends. She thinks that meeting the monster-in-law is going to be a piece of cake, but Sirella has already made up her mind regarding this overgrown sorority girl.
Older Than They Look: Sort of. Jadzia is actually exactly as old as she looks, but through Dax, she has the memories and some of the personality of a much older being. A century old Bajoran magistrate said (paraphrasing) "When I started this hearing, I didn't know if you were as young as my great-granddaughter, or three times as old as I am. Now I'm starting to think you're both."
Omnidisciplinary Scientist: In Season 1, she's only 28. It's confirmed that all of her vast amount of scientific knowledge and multiple degrees were gained prior to receiving the Dax symbiont at the age of 26. While Dax has been hosted by an engineer and a pilot, Jadzia is Dax's first scientist.
Passive-Aggressive Kombat: The cold war with Sirella comes to a head during the ceremonial reading of The Chronicle, a history of the Martok family's unbroken (until now, ahem) bloodline. Jadzia sprinkles in her own extracurricular research, including: a positive spin on an Oliver Cromwell-type figure in Klingon history, the revelation that Sirella's claim to nobility is false, and that her mother-in-law's ancestor was not the Princess but a concubine who lived out of the royal stables.
Sirella: You are STRAYING FROM THE SAGA!
The Pirates Who Don't Do Anything: Is the station's Science Officer, but is rarely seen doing any scientific research and not even lip service is paid to the idea of her administrating the station's (presumed) scientific department. We do, however, see her acting as a Helmsman, Commanding Officer of the Defiant, psuedo-counselor to her friends & advising Sisko as if she were his First Officer. Jadzia is invaluable to the crew, but often not for her work as a scientist.
Pretty Fly for a White Guy: A Trill who is more Klingon than most Klingons.
Promoted Fangirl: in the Star Trek: The Original Series crossover/tribute episode "Trials and Tribble-ations", where she is totally jonesing about being on the original Enterprise. Doubles as an Author Avatar for Ronald D. Moore and Rene Echevarria in this episode per DVD supplementary material.
"I guess the difference between you and me is I remember this time. I lived in this time, and it's hard to not want to be part of it again."
Rank Up: from lieutenant to lieutenant commander at the beginning of Season 4.
Reincarnated as the Opposite Sex: She has the gender of her host of the time. She has been both men and women in past lives.
Renaissance Woman: Jadzia is one of the most learned scientists in Starfleet (having the memories of seven lifetimes certainly doesn't hurt), can play Ferengis under the table at their own game of Tongo, and can outdo Klingons at both fighting and drinking bloodwine.
Rubber-Forehead Aliens: Initially due to the original Trill character makeup involving a forehead, as seen on Star Trek: The Next Generation. Makeup artist Michael Westmore altered the design to match Jadzia's femininity, but the writers hated the look of it. He suggested that she have spots instead, and the idea was adopted to have them running from her temples down the sides of her head, neck, and body. A member of the crew had to draw them on her body with a marker every day before shooting.
Sex Is Violence: Her liaisons with Worf can get pretty destructive. Odo gets a report every time they destroy Worf's quarters, so he enjoys ribbing the couple about it a little. Bashir, on the other hand, decided to stop asking why they were showing up to the infirmary together so often.
Shameless Fanservice Girl: Very casual about her sex life, and tells Kira in “Babel” that it’s fun to receive male attention, as she forgot what it feels like.
Shrinking Violet: We actually learn practically nothing about Jadzia's personality before she become the joined gestalt entity "Jadzia Dax". Heck, we don't even know her full name from official canon (the expanded universe has settled on that her pre-joining name was "Jadzia Idaris"). All we know is that she was a Shrinking Violet: a quiet and painfully shy young girl, but dedicated and hard working, gifted in the sciences. Given her introversion, there might not be much to tell. She had a stable home life with her parents and sister. She had a quiet determination to her, becoming the only Trill initiate to be joined after being initially rejected from the program. Curzon later admitted, however, that he signed her rejection in the first place because he was falling in love with her and thus felt it would be inappropriate for her to be joined - years later, he felt bad about having her rejected under false pretenses due to personal reasons, so he used behind-the-scenes pull to have her unprecedented reapplication accepted.
The Spock: This is her initial characterization, but the writers decided to make her more emotional and fun-loving. Although she still fulfills rational Spock functions, she becomes something of a combination of him and The Kirk.
It's not that forced of a shift, when you consider that an aspect of Spock himself is that in the spirit of science and curiosity, he was always non-judgmental and willing to try new things from new cultures. He was just more subdued and clinical about it.
Statuesque Stunner: Played by the 6' tall Terry Farrell.
Took a Level in Badass: Particularly after Curzon's Klingon-loving personality came to the forefront during her zhian'tara.
Unkempt Beauty: A hungover Dax is something to behold.
Uptight Loves Wild: Jadzia is the most free-spirited Trill ever, and she falls for Worf, the most uptight Klingon ever.
Work Hard, Play Hard: When she works she is an ingenious and competent officer. When she plays she likes gambling, flirting, and making love Klingon Fashion.
You Are in Command Now: During the early days of the Dominion War, with Sisko serving as Admiral Ross' adjutant and Worf serving as Martok's XO, she was given command of the Defiant.