Anything but That!: Very few things can make Worf nervous. Among them are tribbles, and the news that Keiko O'Brien is going to have another baby.
"NOW?!"
Battle Couple: With Jadzia.
Battle Cry: Played for Laughs in "Take Me Out To The Holosuite"
Sisko: Alright, I wanna hear some chatter!
Ezri: Heeeeyy batter batter batter!
Kira: Hey batter batter!
Worf: DEATH TO THE OPPOSITION!
The Big Guy: Often commands the Defiant on missions Sisko can't take himself, the go-to guy when Klingons are involved, and generally a person you want on your side when the chips are down.
Break the Badass: As he eventually reveals, his time in the Jem'Hadar camp actually broke his spirit, and he had been on the verge of letting himself die in the ring, had Martok not noticed.
Bruiser with a Soft Center: Miles' baby can go to sleep in his arms... and initially, only his arms.
And he's always dreamed of a traditional Klingon wedding, with all the trimmings. (Although "soft" might not be the best word given the Klingon, but he's still quite a romantic.)
Cargo Ship: Dax insinuated that Worf's first love is the Defiant. In a sense, he considers it his ship, not Sisko's. Makes sense really; it's a Federation-designed warship, the perfect fit for Worf. The fact that the Defiant is more spartan than other Federation ships makes her an even better fit for a warrior like Worf.
The Comically Serious: Even more so than he was in TNG, thanks to being contrasted against the much less strait-laced DS9 cast.
Garak: Mr. Worf, you're no fun at all.
Worf: ... Good.
Commanding Coolness: He's the Strategic Operations Officer of Deep Space Nine, a somewhat malleable job title giving him authority over the Security office (to Odo's despair) and Ops. He also functions as the Number Two onboard the Defiant, a position that put him at odds with Kira, who held that title over the station itself, at least once.
Deadpan Snarker: A legend in the Star Trek franchise for having one-liners down to an exact science. Often overlaps with The Comically Serious, above.
Death Glare: According to his alternate-timeline descendants in "Children of Time", he can kill people just by glaring at them. He doesn't exactly deny it.
Determinator: Famously stood his ground against ten Jem'Hadar warriors in a Forced Prize Fight. When he finally does hit the mat, it's his opponent who calls it quits.
Ikat'ika: I yield. I cannot defeat this Klingon. I can only kill him, and that no longer holds my interest.
Deuteragonist: Essentially becomes this when he joins the cast; the entire Klingon War arc was more or less built around bringing his character onto the show.
Drill Sergeant Nasty: In "Apocalypse Rising," a mission to Ty'Gokor gives Worf the chance to have his own marching parade of Klingon officers (a surgically-altered Sisko and company) and to abuse them for acting like nancy-boy Starfleet officers. Odo makes a skinny and rather sorry Klingon and O'Brien can barely stifle his laughter. Sisko at least manages to act believable.
The Exile: When Worf stands against Gowron in defiance of his decision to invade Cardassia (in so doing, destroying the Empire's relationship with the Federation), the Chancellor exiles him and strips his family of title, land, and honor. He would be allowed to return later, when Martok adopts him into his house as a brother.
Happily Adopted: As a child he was adopted by human parents. After Gowron disbanded his house, he was invited to join Martok's. As far as Worf and Martok are concerned, they're brothers. Worf found himself on the other side of this trope when he allowed his brother to have his memory erased so he could join a new family.
Happily Married: To Jadzia.
Heartbroken Badass: Worf is, quite simply, devastated after Jadzia is killed. He didn't suffer that much even after K'Ehleyr was murdered by Duras and his performance of the Klingon Death Ritual over her body is one of the few times he actually weeps.
Hopeless Suitor: Crushes hard on Grilka the moment he sees her, and tries courting her the Klingon way; Making a scene in the bar where she can see it. However, her chamberlain has to come and tell him that while she's not offended, thanks to his discommendation Worf's got no chance.
Humble Hero: By Klingon standards, at least. Martok comments at least once that Worf seems to have learned modesty from The Federation.
I Just Want My Beloved to Be Happy:
A non-romantic version. He allowed his brother Kurn to have his memory erased so he could live life as a Klingon in good standing with a new family, even though it meant severing the last remaining tie to his biological family.
While he's not thrilled about Ezri's romance with Julian, since Worf sees Bashir as Manchild who's beneath her, he ultimately gives Ezri his blessing and is happy for her.
Immigrant Patriotism: Played with. He is loyal to the Federation to the point of fighting against the Klingon Empire when they go to war. At the same time, he is obsessed with Klingon tradition more then most Klingons are. (Again, see the TNG character sheet for an accurate analysis of his mentality.)
Incorruptible Pure Pureness: Worf's sense of Klingon honor is inviolate. It cost him dearly in standing amongst his countrymen.
Ironic Fear: Poor Worf is stuck in the unenviable position of being the only person on DS9 who is terrified of tribbles.
Master Swordsman: Given that he earned first place in a tournament back in late-season TNG, can beat Jadzia in a friendly duel, Grilka's bodyguard in a real one (while piloting Quarks body instead of his own too), and actually kill Gowron in a Duel to the Death, he must be one of the best fighters to ever handle a bat'leth. Despite his prowess with the weapon, Worf seems to prefer using a mek'leth in combat, a machete-like weapon half the size (and therefore much easier to carry around).
My Country, Right or Wrong: As Ezri points out in her bluntly honest speech about the Empire, Worf has put up with a lot of crap from them over the years in the name of preserving it, rather than trying to fix it, and if that's the case, what hope is there? Hearing this leads Worf to lean to the other part of the trope; if right, kept right. If wrong, made right.
My Greatest Failure: In "Let He Who is Without Sin...," we learn that Worf's uptight nature is the result of a childhood soccer match, when young Worf accidentally headbutted an opposing player. Klingon foreheads being what they are, the kid died. This tragedy convinced Worf to rein in his Klingon passion.
Not So Stoic: See Heartbroken Badass.
Number Two: Is First Officer of the Defiant. In practice, he and Kira share this role, which is lampshaded in "Apocalypse Rising".
An Odd Place to Sleep: Right from Day One, Worf has trouble adjusting to the morally-grey atmosphere on the station. Following a string of disasters, he decides that the only way to adjust to life aboard the station is to live outside it, and makes the Defiant his crib.
Offered the Crown: After his killing of Gowron in "Tacking Into the Wind" he basically earned the right to rule the Klingon Empire. He chose wisely instead to hand it to Martok. A bit of running theme with Worf. Whenever he gets involved with Klingon politics, someone ends up owing their new position to him, usually because he's paved the way for them by killing someone. Over the course of TNG and DS9 he is involved in the accessions of Gowron and Martok to the Chancellorship, the crowning of Kahless' clone as the ceremonial Emperor of the Klingon Empire, and his brother Kurn joining the High Council. A cut scene would have had Worf confiding in Ezri that his one regret was that his father wasn't there to see him, if only for a moment, standing at the very pinnacle of the Klingon Empire.
Parental Neglect: He wasn't the best father towards Alexander, essentially dumping Alexander to be raised by his adoptive grandparents. Even when Alexander eventually joined him on the Enterprise, Worf was at best emotionally distant. As usual, this is largely because of Worf's distorted sense of Klingon culture. He was more obsessed with ensuring Alexander didn't suffer his dishonor rather than being the father his son needed.
Persona Non Grata: At the start of Season 4, Worf ends up being exiled from the Klingon Empire again due to his refusal to participate in the Klingon invasion of Cardassia. He eventually regains his good standing in the Empire when he is taken into Martok's family as a blood-brother.
A Real Man is a Killer: Worf has completely forgotten how to negotiate in Klingon politics. It's not about giving a stirring speech and bandying together to fight your enemy (that's the Starfleet way). No, it's more like standing on the deck of an old galleon and whoever takes their eye off the ball gets a bat-leth in the eye socket as they each try and succeed each other, everybody jostling for command. In TNG, Worf was told he has no business putting on a Klingon uniform. Here, Kurn shows up Worf by plugging a Klingon who was planning to stab his clueless brother. This guy needs to pick which side of the line he is going to stand on. That's his curse.
Real Men Wear Pink: When no-one else is around, Worf listens to Klingon opera. Loud Klingon opera. At one point during "In the Cards", Nog has to retune his collection for him to get rid of audio disruptions that only Worf hears or cares about.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: Being The Stoic and The Comically Serious, he's the blue oni whenever he's with anyone more gregarious like Jadzia, Garak, or Martok (or, hell, just about anybody except Odo).
Short-Lived Leadership: After slaying Gowron, Worf technically becomes Chancellor of the Klingon Empire. His chancellorship lasts for about two minutes and his only official act is to immediately abdicate and hand the position over to Martok.
The Stoic: "I do not smirk. But if I did, this would be a good opportunity."
This Is My Chair: Worf has a very specific seat in the Defiant's mess hall, and he will not sit anywhere else. People who foolishly do sit in his seat are glared at until they move.
Took a Level in Badass: Suffers from The Worf Effect much less than he did in The Next Generation, and handily proves to be the crew's best fighter on multiple occasions. Being Older and Wiser likely helps (it's only been a few years, but those few years have been packed with experience).
Took a Level in Jerkass: His run on DS9 saw Worf in a long period of mourning; first for the Enterprise-D where he spent the best years of his life, and then for his murdered wife Jadzia. He becomes even more withdrawn and short-tempered than usual, refusing to mix with his crewmates at social gatherings and one time even claiming they never truly understood Jadzia when she was alive. Worf did respect the abilities of the DS9 crew, though, and always apologized in the end.
Uptight Loves Wild: Worf is the most uptight Klingon ever, and he falls for Jadzia, the most free-spirited Trill ever.
Warrior Poet: Loves Klingon Opera, Klingon legends, and Klingon traditions.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Worf is shown in "Trials and Tribble-lations" to be very uneasy around tribbles. This extends to the entire Klingon people: tribbles were such an ecological threat that the Klingons singlehandedly drove them to extinction.
The Worf Effect: Starting to wane by this point, thank goodness. In fact, this was one of the reasons Dorn joined the show.
You Remind Me of X: Worf arrives on the station at first facing the same doubts Sisko had in the beginning, considering resigning, being stuck in the past, etc. This is symbolized by Worf transferring to a red Command uniform.
You Shall Not Pass!: If there was still any doubt about Worf being a Klingon badass among Klingon badasses, he proves it by going through an endless battle royale with Jem'Hadar to ensure that Garak can contact their Runabout and they can escape. At first he is a fresh faced competitor but it isn't long before he is exhausted and beaten, yet still he heads back into the ring to buy them more time.