Almighty Janitor: Despite only being a cadet, he is able to work a Chain of Deals to get Chief O'Brien the supplies he needed while getting Martok a better batch of bloodwine, without Captain Sisko ever realizing his desk was gone. His Ferengi hearing came in handy during several missions. Other than Chief O'Brien and Rom, he is the only engineer on the station who understands the amalgam of Cardassian, Bajoran, and Starfleet technology that keeps the station running. And, he was the first Starfleet officer on the station to learn about the Romulans signing a non-aggression pact with the Dominion.
Artificial Limbs: After the Siege of AR-558. It's actually a synthetically-grown replacement functionally identical to the one he lost, but he still struggles with getting used to it at first.
Authority in Name Only: In "Blaze of Glory," Nog began goose-stepping around the promenade like a mall ninja. He baffled General Martok by marching right to some Klingons and telling them to clear off. "No loitering!"
Book Dumb: At the beginning of the series, he can't read or write in English. Jake teaching him to do so is a big part of their friendship.
Broken Pedestal: Initially, he hero-worships Red Squadron, the Academy's best of the best. His adventure with them in "Valiant" burns it out of him.
Dawson Casting: At the time of the pilot episode, Nog was 13~14 years old. Eisenberg himself just turned 24.
Due to the Dead: By the time of the 32nd century, Starfleet would name an Eisenberg-classnote  starship in his honor.
Felon's Failson: Nog gets arrested by Odo in the first episode for petty crime, and his further attempts to be a stereotypical Ferengi bear no fruit. He instead winds up becoming the first Ferengi to be accepted to Starfleet Academy after persuading Captain Sisko to sponsor him, and finishes the series as a junior-grade lieutenant.
The Fixer: Nog is so well-connected it's almost scary. Unlike Quark, who won't so much as offer you a tissue for free, Nog is happy to put his connections to use making Chief O'Brien's life run smoother. Word of God says he's based on Milo Minderbinder from Catch-22 (1970), the guy who can seemingly acquire anything.
Going Native: With humans to some degree. Not least in a quintessential human activity.
Grammar Nazi: After his return from Starfleet Academy, Nog goes over one of Jake's attempts at writing. Despite Jake's hope for feedback, all he gets is spelling corrections.
Gung Holier Than Thou: He is rather enthusiastic about militaristic behavior, especially for a Ferengi.
Heroic BSoD: The episode "It's Only a Paper Moon" focuses on the psychological toll that AR-558 took on him—withdrawn, defensive, and unwilling to go back into reality after the trauma of losing his leg. He more or less has PTSD.
Informed Flaw: He claims not to have the "lobes" for business, but he proves an extremely canny operator who can get just about any part or favor required. It's possible that he might not have the savvy or ruthlessness to go up against other Ferengi as adversaries, but as fixer for his comrades, he is eminently capable.
Legendary in the Sequel: Star Trek: Discovery establishes that Nog made such a name for himself they named a ship after him in the 32nd century..
Loser Son of Loser Dad: As he bluntly points out to Sisko, he is, by Ferengi standards, a failure from a family of failures. As such, he's desperate to prove himself. That said, he doesn't hate his father, but feels a strong contempt for the deeply flawed nature of Ferengi culture that his father feels beholden to, since it more or less ensures that his father will only be a failure due to their lack of ruthless business acumen. Nog is just self-aware enough to recognize that unless he does something different (like joining Starfleet), he's going to become no different in his fate.
Neat Freak: Became one after attending Starfleet Academy, much to the annoyance of Jake, who's much more of a slob, when two became roommates.
Never Learned to Read: An early subplot has Jake teaching Nog to read.
NO INDOOR VOICE: All but outright stated to be part of the whole Compensating for Something package.
Odd Friendship: With Vic Fontaine in "It's Only a Paper Moon."
His friendship with Jake Sisko is something that both their parents initially try to discourage.
He and General Martok aren't quite friends, given the huge discrepancies in culture and rank, but they're extremely respectful to each other. Martok always greets him before anyone else when he enters Ops as a result of Nog having the cajones to enforce station regulations to a Klingon general.
Plucky Middie: Once the Dominion War starts, he's still a cadet for much of the initial invasion until he's field promoted to ensign.
Rank Up: He's promoted to Ensign before graduating, mainly because they really need officers. Counting alternate timelines and things that didn't stick, he is actually one of the most promoted characters on the show.
In the Finale, he is promoted to Lieutenant Junior Grade.
In the expanded universe he would go on to become Chief Engineer of the Enterprise-E and eventually was promoted to captain of the USS Chimera (as implied in "The Visitor").
Safe Cracking: Using his superior Ferengi hearing. Came into play during the heist in "Badda-Bing, Badda-Bang".
Sanity Slippage Song: Bashir brought some Vic Fontaine MP3s to AR-558 and Quark played "I'll Be Seeing You" for Nog while Nog was wounded and recovering in the infirmary, even during the pitched battle. When he came back from surgery, a traumatized Nog continued to replay the songs over and over again in his quarters. The Incessant Music Madness drove Jake to kick him out, and Nog limped his way upstairs to the Las Vegas hologram. ("It's Only a Paper Moon")
The Scrounger: By the time he joins Starfleet, he's an expert at navigating the "Great Material Continuum", much to Chief O'Brien's bemusement (and relief).
Shell-Shocked Veteran: After losing his leg in the Siege of AR-558.
Space Cadet
Token Heroic Orc: At first, appears to be playing against the Ferengi hat of capitalistic greed full-tilt. However, once in Starfleet, he starts subverting it by using his innate Ferengi business sense to requisition needed supplies seemingly out of thin air (see The Scrounger above). He's still very much a Starfleet Officer after his Character Development, but he doesn't completely discard where he came from either.
Toxic Friend Influence: Nog introduced Jake to the concept of whopper lies. Later (hilariously) reversed when Nog becomes the straight arrow, while Jake drags him into zany schemes.
Unusual Ears