Ambition Is Evil: It's the cause of her rise to power, and her eventual downfall. She seeks to serve the Prophets, but she can't understand that her desire to be chosen by them is arrogant and selfish and the reason that they reject her which sends her down the path of evil.
Badass Pacifist: During the Occupation. She never picked up a rifle and fought as Kira did, but she played her own part in keeping the Bajoran people's faith in the Prophets alive. By the time the series starts, Winn is more than a little annoyed that the resistance fighters are the only ones honored and remembered for their actions.
Big Bad Wannabe: For all her attempts to come out on top, she never manages to become a star player in the Big Bad hierarchy as she gets Out-Gambitted by both Sisko and Dukat multiple times.
Catchphrase: "My child..." It's astonishing how much Sugary Malice Louise Fletcher can cram into two little words.
The Chosen Wannabe: It's no secret that she wanted to be the Emissary, and that she resents Sisko for being granted this honor.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: She turns on Jaro, the Prophets, and finally the Pah-Wraiths, right before the end.
Condescending Calmness: GOOD. GRAVY. She is full of this stuff, and she uses it to prop herself on a high horse, to make others around her look less considerate and composed.
Disproportionate Retribution: Was willing to start a civil war on Bajor... over some farmers not returning soil detox equipment.
The Dreaded: Her presence becomes something of a minor Running Gag for Sisko. Whenever his day is going badly and things don't look like it can get any worse, Kai Winn will show up.
Establishing Character Moment: The first time you meet her, she calmly accuses Keiko O'Brien of blasphemy and sets about turning the Bajorans on the station against her. And then she blows up the school. And then she tries to have Vedek Bareil assassinated. This all shows that Winn is a Hypocrite who doesn't truly care about her people's beliefs unless they serve to help get what she wants.
Even Evil Has Standards:
She schemes, plots assassinations, undermines Sisko at every turn, but when she finds out that the Bajoran 'spiritual guide' she slept with is Gul Dukat, she looks like she's going to throw up.
For all her other faults, Winn never collaborated with the Cardassians during the occupation of Bajor. She was even imprisoned for five years.
When Kira presents evidence that the Circle, a "Bajor for Bajorans" extremist group, is actually being supplied by the Cardassians, Winn is the first person to switch sides.
Even she finds Weyoun an insufferable chore.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: It never once crosses her mind that doing good deeds for the sake of doing good deeds is why the Prophets favor Sisko over her.
Evil Is Hammy: It is very, very easy to see Louise Fletcher positively luxuriating in the sheer hamminess of this character.
Evil Matriarch: She is the high queen of passive-aggression. And bombing schools.
"She wanted power and she was ambitious. She was sort of a Margaret Thatcher in space, or, as I used to say, I was the Pope in space … from old days when Popes were ruthless and powerful and exerted their powers and fought wars and did all kinds of naughty things."
— Louise Fletcher
Fatal Flaw: For Winn, it's unwarranted self-importance; she refuses to accept that to be good, one must first be humble in practice, and that claiming to be a humble servant of the gods while pursuing religious power and authority is utter hypocrisy and will only lead to corruption and evil.
Foil: The ambitious Sinister Minister to Bariel's Humble Hero Good Shepherd.
The Fundamentalist: Subverted. In her first appearance, she deliberately plays this up, starting a dispute over Keiko's school referring to the Prophets as "wormhole entities" and not directly addressing Bajoran religious beliefs about them (Keiko wasn't denying any of them, the whole complaint was her terminology being neutral). By the end of the episode, even her supporters were starting to realize how absurd this was, but it was never meant to be more than a pretext for a manufactured controversy to provide cover for her personal assassin.
Heel–Face Turn: About five seconds before the end.
Holier than Thou: If she's onscreen with Sisko, expect her to make a dig at him for being foreign. If she's onscreen with Kira, expect "gentle" reminders about just who is the Kai.
Hopeless Suitor: A religious example. She has devoted her life to the Prophets and is consistently ignored by them, which makes her increasingly resentful whenever they speak to or possess someone else. To the viewer it's glaringly obvious she gets overlooked because of her character, though she doesn't see it.
Ignored Epiphany: In the lead up toward the finale, Winn gets a visit from the Pah-Wraiths, which utterly terrifies her, so much so she actually goes to Kira for advice(!) And then Kira suggests that if she is serious about wanting to do good, she should step down as Kai. Cue Winn making up excuses about how Bajor needs her, and that she wants to repent in order to be a better Kai. After all, if the Prophets wanted her gone, they'd have said something, right? Winn is so blinded by her own self-importance that she refuses to accept that giving up her authority is only the way to repent her self-serving ways.
It's All About Me: Although she's a believer, she spends most of her time as Kai trying to wrestle influence away from Sisko because the prophets chose him - an alien and an outsider - and not her, to be their emissary. She claims to be a humble and devout servant of the Prophets, but it's clear as the series goes on that Kai Winn only cares about serving the interests of Kai Winn. It never even occurs to her that a genuine servant of a higher calling is chosen because they will not seek that calling in the first place, since ambition always serves itself first and foremost.
Jerkass Has a Point: In "Rapture," Winn does an epic speech to Kira on how, despite what Kira thinks, Winn suffered as much as anyone else during the occupation.
Winn: Those of you who were in the Resistance, you're all the same. You think you're the only ones who fought the Cardassians, that you saved Bajor single-handedly. Perhaps you forget, Major, the Cardassians arrested any Bajoran found to be teaching the word of the Prophets. I was in a Cardassian prison camp for five years, and I can remember each and every beating I suffered. And while you had your weapons to protect you, all I had was my faith... and my courage. Walk with the Prophets, child... I know I will.
Never My Fault: In her arrogance, she twists those who oppose or even disagree with her as being misguided, unreasonable or even evil, in a way that always frames herself as just and correct in her actions, even when things go horribly wrong as a result of them, and others as the reason for those problems.
Not-So-Well-Intentioned Extremist: Downplayed. She certainly likes to think that she has good intentions... but some of her most sinister actions, such as orchestrating a school bombing or trying to have her rival assassinated, speak far more to ruthless ambition than anything else. In the final season she privately admits to Dukat that she never had the genuine spirituality that other Bajorans had (for instance, she didn't feel the religious awe the rest of her people did when the wormhole originally opened) and she's been playing at being pious because she didn't know what else to do. In short, Winn aspires to be a Well-Intentioned Extremist, but in reality she can't even manage that and ends up as just a fundamentally insecure Narcissist trying desperately to convince others- and likely herself- that she is anything else by pretending to be more religiously devout/fanatical than she actually is.
Obliviously Evil: She is so wrapped up in her own self-importance that she refuses to understand that having ambition to serve the Prophets is antithetical to the humility required to be genuinely good. Eventually she comes to serve the Pah Wraiths instead, believing the Prophets to be the evil ones because in her eyes, only evil gods would reject someone who desires their favor.
Omnicidal Maniac: Subverted; while she seems to become this towards the very end of the show's run, she actually just pretends to do so in order to get Dukat help her to release the Pah-Wraiths, so that she can become their emissary. Unfortunately for her, they prefer the idea of teaming up with Dukat, who actually does want to destroy the universe.
OOC Is Serious Business:
When she shows up on DS9 to ask for Sisko's advice about the non-aggression pact offered by the Dominion. Winn's not her usual sneaky, oily self but is instead genuinely interested in his advice.
Likewise, when visited by the Pah Wraiths, she's so utterly terrified that when she asks Kira for advice (itself a pretty staggering move from her), she does it without any of her usual passive-aggressiveness. Right up until Kira suggests retiring, that is. Then it's back to business as usual.
Pet the Dog:
Her offscreen actions during the occupation of Bajor. Despite receiving beatings at the hands of Cardassian soldiers, Winn continued to preach about her faith and used her position to save a transport of condemned Bajorans by bribing the officer in charge with gemstones taken from temples.
In "Rapture" she's a little less passive-aggressive than usual after Sisko proves his worth by discovering the Lost City, and she even helps Sisko communicate with the Prophets seemingly as a genuine gesture of good-will rather than out of any benefit to herself. And while in the presence of others she supports Sisko's journey despite the toll on his health, in private she warns him of the dangers of consulting an orb and asks if he's sure about it.
Pointy-Haired Boss: In "Life Support," Winn revealed she had feet of clay all along. She craves high office but lacks spine to make the tough decisions, always delegating and passing the buck.
Redemption Equals Death: Gives Sisko key information immediately before Dukat kills her.
The Resenter: She can't stand the fact that Sisko is The Chosen One instead of her. Leads to crossing the Moral Event Horizon.
Sinister Minister: She kicks off her first major role plotting the assassination of a rival who was favored to become Kai. Shortly after that, she involves herself in a coup that intends to expel the Federation.
Smug Snake: For all her sugary words, Winn loves to rub her status in everyone's faces while they are barely holding their tempers.
Spanner in the Works: Her appearance frequently throws Starfleet for a loop. And she deliberately disrupts the Reckoning, a battle between the Prophets and Pah-Wraiths that has been prophesied for thousands of years.
Sugary Malice: Winn can be very passive-aggressive and loves to censure people with benign words.
Winn: How long will you be with us, Major?
Kira: I'm not sure.
Winn: Feel free to stay as many days as you like. Even a week if necessary.
Terms of Endangerment: She calls most everyone "My child", but just try to catch her ever saying it with anything other than the previously mentioned Sugary Malice.
Then Let Me Be Evil: Played with. Winn has been up to shady things from day one, but nevertheless genuinely considers herself devout and maintains a veneer of piety. Eventually, though, after being ignored by the Prophets her entire life and forced to watch Sisko become their favorite, she chooses to embrace the Pah-wraiths, and with them, her inner villain.
The Un-Favourite: In a religious sense. Despite her Kai title and obstination, the prophets will never give her an audience, even if she's using orbs, which were created so Bajorans could have access at any time to their Gods. It's particularly noticeable because everyone else who tries will get one. Hell, even Quark had it on his first try. note  Though when she finally meets one, even kneeling before it to show her devotion, it proceeds to ignore her spectacularly. It plays a good part in her Face–Heel Turn against them. Of course, her power-mongering and Holier than Thou attitude probably has a good deal to do with their rejection of her.
Unholy Matrimony: More than once, she has become romantically involved with an evil man for the sake of ambition.
It's implied that she was romantically involved with Jaro Essa, the secret leader of the Circle. When she learns that he was unwittingly buying arms from the Cardassians, she drops him like a hot potato.
When she turns her back on the Prophets and pledges loyalty to the Pah Wraiths, she becomes romantically involved with Anjohl Tennan. When she discovers that Anjohl is really Dukat in disguise, she is revolted.