Affably Evil: Initially an irascible corner boy, Bodie mellows out enough to be a people's person when not plying his trade of pusher, especially during his interactions with Poot and even McNulty and Carver, the former he bonds over shared disillusion with the job and the latter who enforces it as a way to be civil even when both may want to bust each other's asses. Interestingly, this trait is present even back in season 1, during a friendly pool game with Herc and Carver after his arrest and beating, only becoming more pronounced with time.
Alliterative Name: "Bodie" Broadus. Of course, only if his nickname is taken into account.
Anti-Villain: Not as apparent as D'Angelo, but despite his violent trade Bodie has a heart and some standards. Both Carver and McNulty take a liking to him by Season 4.
Batter Up!: Bodie, along with Poot, organizes a posse in the Season 1 finale to defend the Pit as their territory against some upstarts. He, in particular, carries the bat.
Book Dumb: Bodie isn't very literate and his vocabulary is poor, but he's a deceptively intelligent and perceptive young man. He repeatedly outsmarts the police because they don't expect pushers to be smart, he's quick to pick up on new concepts, and he has deep insight into the cyclical nature of the game. The tragedy with Bodie is that if he'd had actual opportunities or at least not grown up in west Baltimore, he'd probably be in school studying law or sociology instead of busting his ass selling drugs for low pay.
Boom, Headshot!: O-Dog puts two bullets in the back of his head.
Character Tics: By season 4, Bodie has started spitting through his teeth regularly, usually in response to the increasingly bitter circumstances unfolding around him.
Chess Motifs:
In the third episode, Bodie and Wallace play checkers with a chess set. D'Angelo comes over and tries to teach them chess in terms of the drug trade and the characters, with plenty of subtext; the pawns are street dealers and muscle, the boss of the clan, Avon is the King and the all-powerful and flexible Stringer Bell is the Queen. Everyone stays the same, but all Bodie takes from the explanation is that very successful (read:smartass) pawns can “make it to the other end” and become queens in rare circumstances, or so he’d like to believe. As he later finds out, however, the game is rigged to keep pawns like him in place.
During his last stand, Chris and Snoop take on Bodie by ganging up on him diagonally, like bishops, which fit their role in Stanfield Organization. Unable to run away, Bodie stands his ground and shoots them diagonally, like a pawn moves to take pieces in chess. Then he gets shot by O-Dog who comes out of an alley and turns left, like a﻿ knight would move, where a pawn couldn't protect himself. Even better: Bishops and knights are the pieces that D'Angelo didn't mention on the first chess scene. Bodie, a pawn, couldn't have been prepared.
Childhood Friends: With Poot and Wallace. It's very clear the three of them go way back before getting in The Game, which makes it difficult for Bodie to reconcile Wallace's snitching or killing him per Stringer's orders. The sight of Little Kevin's body being pulled out of a vacant is enough to break him completely and start moving against Marlo.
A Death in the Limelight: The episode where he dies is one where he has some of the most screentime, and contains a lot of self reflection on his part.
Death Is Dramatic: Bodie's last stand is also fairly meaningful up until its seemingly anticlimactic end.
Decomposite Character: Based on the real life gangster Nathan 'Bodie' Barksdale, whose name the fictional Bodie uses, and Bodie reflects the real life Barksdale's early career. The real life Barksdale did rise to become a Kingpin, so his later career and days as a Kingpin are given to Avon.
Do Not Go Gentle: Once he realizes Chris and Snoop are sneaking around his corner in a bid to kill him, he decides to go out fighting. What makes this notable is that up until then everyone who became a target for Chris and Snoop have just begged for mercy or tried to escape.
Come on with it, motherfuckers! I don't give a fuck! I'm right here! You ain't putting me up in one of them empty-ass houses neither!
Dumbass Has a Point: Much to Rhonda's surprise, he successfully alleges "contrapment" in the aftermath of Hamsterdam. McNulty is amused by it and later hails him as "Mr. Entrapment".
Even Evil Has Standards: He's an unrepentant drug dealer willing to kill as part of his job, but even so he's disgusted by Marlo's callousness and brutality. When he sees the bodies of Marlo's victims being pulled out of the vacant houses, he just loses it.
Bodie: FUCK Marlo, man, FUCK him! And anybody that thinks it's alright to do people this way!
Evil Virtues: Hardworking, honest, competent, (mostly, as he does have moments where he goes too far trying to please his bosses) and loyal.
Becomes key to his Heel Realization, as he realizes that despite always having been a loyal, honest and hard worker, he has been completely discarded by the higher ups of "the game" and any dangled promise of upward mobility was bullshit.
Fatal Flaw: Thinking it's cool to be a gangster is the main reason he can't step away from the drug trade and ends up losing his life.
Friendly Enemy:
Between seasons 3 and 4, he develops this sort of relationship with Carver, who greats him as a friend while he acts annoyed but doesn't start anything.
Definitely has this with McNulty, who respects him as much smarter and more honourable than the vast majority of pushers, while he in turn respects McNulty as an officer that treats him and other street kids with more respect and humanity that almost anyone around, including the high-level drug kingpins who treat their soldiers and pushers as largely disposable pawns.
Glory Days: Come the fourth season, with the Barksdale crew largely dismantled and Bodie now on his own as an independent dealer, it's clear that he misses the time when the Barksdales were dominant and he was part of the organization. He apparently reminisces about it often with his crew (once Poot gets out of jail they recognize him from Bodie's stories) and when Bodie discusses what he'd like to do with Marlo, we get this exchange between him and Slim Charles, who obviously isn't as nostalgic as Bodie:
Bodie: Now I'm standing here like an asshole cause I got no muscle, no back-up... shit, man, if this was the old days...
Slim Charles: Yeah, well, the thing about the old days... they the old days.
Go-Karting with Bowser: Or Playing Pool With The Police after Herc and Carver beat him up. By season 4, he's eating lunch with McNulty.
The Guards Must Be Crazy: Beaten up and left by Herc and Carver, Bodie escapes from juvenile hall in suburban Baltimore by simply grabbing a mop bucket to pass the guard booth and then walking out the side door. And the disguise is not even tested as the guard is distracted chatting with a lady. Grabbing the mop may have been less about needing a disguise and more about wanting help standing after the vicious beating he had taken. He's next seen trying to hitch a ride right outside the prison.
Hard Work Fallacy: Deconstructed. Bodie, a lowly soldier in The Game since childhood, figures that by doing everything he's told and working hard in the drug trade he can eventually advance beyond his station. By the later seasons, he's still in the same position if not worse off, having suffered several setbacks, including a hostile street takeover from Marlo and realizes that there's no real upward mobility in The Game.
Bodie: We like them little bitches on the chess board.
McNulty: Pawns.
Heel–Face Door-Slam: Just when he appears ready to inform on and help bring down the Stanfield organization, he is spotted talking to McNulty by one of the gang's enforcers and murdered.
Heroic Heelization Speech: Rare anti-villainous example. Bodie's code dictates that snitching is one of the lowest things someone in The Game can do (having killed one of his childhood friends, Wallace, over this) and is disgusted by those who choose to do so rather than face blowback. However, once Marlo takes over his business and gradually shows a complete disregard for all of the rules Bodie lives by, as well as a disdain for any disposable soldier, Bodie decides he must compromise this particular rule to stop him, even if it means violating his own rules and getting put in the crossfire.
Bodie: I ain't no snitch. I been doing this a long time, I ain't said nothing to no cop. ... But Marlo, this nigga and his kind, man... th-they got to fall. They got to.
McNulty: Well, for that to happen, somebody's gotta step up.
Bodie: [hesitates for a few seconds] I'll do what I gotta. I don't give a fuck. Just don't ask me to live on my fucking knees, you know?
Hidden Depths: Hidden from the police at least. Albeit powerless, he's not the average street airhead but a very reflective and thoughtful player, as Jimmy gets to learn.
History Repeats: Bodie's fate is quite reminiscent of Wallace's. He also becomes disillusioned by The Game's casual violence and decides to talk to the cops, only to be killed before he can cooperate.
Hot-Blooded: While he mellows out over time, Bodie still has the spirit of a fiery thug. After seeing the bodies taken out of the vacants, he vents his anger by breaking the window of a police car, leading to a scuffle with the cops. This incident, and McNulty subsequently getting the charges dropped and driving him from the prison, directly lead to his murder.
I Did What I Had to Do: This is how he views the role he and Poot played in killing Wallace.
Bodie: We had to do Wallace!
I Never Said It Was Poison: After a gang shootout, Bodie wipes fingerprints off the guns used, puts them in a backpack, and throws the backpack from a car into the river, where it lands on a barge and is turned over to the police. Cole and Norris later interrogate Bodie, produce the backpack and claim they found his fingerprints on one of the guns. Bodie calls their bluff and asks for a lawyer.
Irony: Gets enraged when he sees Little Kevin's body being brought out of a vacant, angrily decrying Marlo, saying he's killing people for no reason. While he is right about this; Marlo would kill someone for simply "disrespecting" him as in the case of the security guard, in Little Kevin's case he was killed for being an unreliable weak link, which is one of the reasons Bodie and Poot killed Wallace. Poot himself lampshades that Marlo probably had his reasons.
Jaded Washout: He's been in the game since he was 13 and eventually becomes worn-out by it. See his speech under Seen It All.
Last Stand: Bodie spots Chris and Snoop lurking around his corner late at night, and realizes that he must be a target for them to kill. Rather than try to run to safety he opts to stand and fight.
Bodie: Yo, this my corner! I ain't running nowhere!
Meaningless Villain Victory: At the end of season 1, Bodie finally gets transferred to the towers (after killing his friend Wallace) where can make big money dealing dope. Unfortunately, Stringer secretly has given away territory which includes the towers to rival gangs in exchange for a cut of their better drug supply. Bodie has to fight off rival dealers who he does not know has a right to be there. By season 3, the towers themselves get demolished so he's out on the street again.
My God, What Have I Done?: This is his facial expression immediately after shooting Wallace. For all his bravado and tough talk, he's clearly shocked at what's he's done, although perhaps mostly because it was done to a friend, as he shows little hesitation to fight against rival gangsters. He's shown to still be deeply troubled by it years later.
Old Soldier: By Season 4, he feels old, as he has been at it since he was 13.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Especially in the beginning. It took a personal police file and raiding of his grandma's house to find his name was Preston; even then, he's still called "Bodie" by most people.
Overzealous Underling: Briefly, in the second season. When business is going terribly for the Barksdale gang and Stringer and the higher ups don't seem to be taking any action, Bodie decides to take some initiative and fight another crew for territory. This quickly escalates from brawling in the streets to a shootout where an innocent young boy is killed by a stray bullet. The boy's death brings an uncomfortable amount of police attention down on the Barksdales, and Stringer chastises Bodie for having kickstarted the whole thing.
Parental Abandonment: His mother died when he was 4, (at least according to his grandmother) and there's no sign of his father. It's likely that the closest thing he has to a father figure is Stringer, who encourages Bodie on several occasions, praises him when Bodie shows insight, and offers sage advice in an attempt to get Bodie to mature.
The Pawn: Like in a chessboard, he believes that being one of those competent "bald little bitches" will bring some rewards. He eventually realizes this is not the case.
Prophetic Name: Sadly, Bodie ends up as one of the bodies the Stanfield gang leave in their wake.
Punch-Clock Villain: Although he's (initially) enamored by the ideal of the self-made gangster, Bodie is only in this line of work because it's the only thing that's available to him. His intelligence is tragically wasted on the tedious, dangerous work he does, and it's not even especially rewarding work at that.
Rule of Symbolism: Another character whose death scene becomes noticeably symbolic. Bodie, who had been explicitly compared to a pawn in chess, commits to his Last Stand by firing several diagonal shots at the oncoming Cris and Snoop while unbeknownst to him, O-Dog creeps out of an alley behind him and makes a sharp left turn to deliver two shots to Bodie's head not unlike the movement of a knight taking out a pawn in chess.
Seen It All: He's like this in regard to the drug game by the time Season 4 comes around, and is growing increasingly world weary and disillusioned with The Game.
I've been doing this a long time. I feel old. I've been out there since I was 13, I ain't never fucked up a count, never stole off a package, never did some shit that I wasn't told to do. ... They want us to stand with them, right, but where the fuck they at when they supposed to be standing by us? I mean when shit goes bad, and there's hell to pay, where they at? This game is rigged, man.
Secret Test of Character: Following orders, Bodie and some other Mooks are sent to Philadelphia to pick up some drugs stashed in a parked car. Bodie, in particular, has to memorize the route and check his odometer down to the tenth of a mile. What Bodie doesn't know is that Stringer has a car following Bodie the whole time, and the route he picked goes right through a construction zone (necessitating a detour) just to see how Bodie would handle it.
Street Smart: Multiple examples. Hilarity Ensues when he sees right through Herc and Carver's (admittedly terrible) Good Cop/Bad Cop routine. He's also aware of the concept of entrapment, although not the actual term for it, and uses it to get himself off after being arrested at Hamsterdam, also earning him a lot of respect from McNulty.
Sympathy for the Devil: Jimmy takes a liking to the kid. Unfortunately, Bodie is spotted by Marlo's gang during his interactions with the police and is killed for it.
Those Two Guys: With Poot, especially in Seasons 1 and 2 where they are rarely seen apart.
Undying Loyalty: To his friends in the Barksdale crew and later the people who work for him when he becomes an independent dealer. When he grudgingly agrees to inform on the Stanfield gang, one of his conditions is that he will not say anything about anyone working for him or other former Barksdale Organization members, despite the fact that there are few of them left and those who are left didn't come to his aid when he needed it.