Ascended Extra: Introduced in Season 1 as a One-Scene Wonder before playing a bigger role in the later seasons.
The Bad Guy Wins: He's a compulsive conman with strings everywhere and a silver tongue. By his own wits, he is able to overturn a charge of corruption brought by the Baltimore D.A., who wanted to shine at his expense; unwittingly, the failed prosecution also brought down the federal syndication that the FBI wanted to pin on him.
Blackmail: On the receiving end. Davis for once gets outconned by Lester who threatens to go Federal with some major, undisclosed evidence unless Davis provides some information about where the drug money goes. Little does the Senator know that the Attorney General had already turned down the case after the fiasco in the local court made Davis a hero.
Bullying a Dragon: Clay Davis scams Stringer, a high-ranking Baltimore drug lord who is behind dozens of murders, because he believes himself to be immune from reprisal, he even brags about it to Lester Freamon. Stringer is offended enough to try to order the hit anyway, before being overridden by Avon. There are hints Stringer was still planning to carry out the assassination, so Davis is lucky that Stringer was shot by Mouzone and Omar before it could come to fruition. Downplayed in that Stringer Bell doesn't have nearly as much clout as Clay Davis and the hit on Clay Davis would cause as much trouble (if not more) for Stringer Bell as it would Clay Davis.
Catchphrase: "Sheeeeeeeeiiiiiiit." Sometimes he elaborates a bit to say "some shameful shit", in a more articulate way.
Chewbacca Defense: Makes bullshit arguments in court. He still charms the audience in the room through hinging on Refuge in Audacity.
Commonality Connection: He tries to soft-rope Avon in telling him they are both from the streets and that they wouldn't want go back to them. The business pitch falls flat on Barksdale as Davis fails to recognize that is exactly what Avon wants
Con Man: In all but name. A real shakedown artist.
Norman: He's slick, apologizes for the short con and in the next breath setting us up for the long.
Consummate Liar: Clay Davis is sleazy but when he talks, he is able to make anyone from gangsters to grand jury to believe him with words alone. He can say he gave away all of city hall's fund money to single mothers and desperate children without any evidence to back him up and no one will argue about it.
Corrupt Politician: Any sort of political corruption you can imagine, Clay Davis does. Regularly accepts bribes from drug lords? Check. Runs a charity that supposedly helps impoverished schools when he instead pockets the donations for himself? Check. Takes bribes from Stringer Bell in exchange for giving government contracts to Stringer's legitimate business ventures, but instead takes advantage of Stringer's inexperience as a businessman to pocket the money and do nothing in exchange? Check. Makes a deal with Carcetti to support him in exchange for $20,000, then promptly breaks their agreement and supports Royce instead? Check. "Corrupt" doesn't begin to describe him.
Crocodile Tears: Sheds them with utter conviction in court during his last speech, it's enough to get him acquitted.
Establishing Character Moment: While he makes a minor appearance before, the first scene that shows his true nature is coming with Burrell to meet Daniels, who had arrested his driver Day-Day when he was acting as a bagman for the Barksdales. Davis tries to convince Daniels that it was a misunderstanding, but when Daniels doesn't budge (there was probable cause because Damian got cash from a known drug suspect that was manicured and banded by denomination), Davis suddenly becomes an extremely unpleasant Jerkass and admits he doesn't care where the campaign money comes from. This shows him as an unscrupulous conman who is just out for himself.
Even Evil Has Standards: Despite being thoroughly corrupt, he has contempt for Maurice Levy and other drug lawyers, calling himself "small potatoes" compared to the corruption they do by laundering drug money.
Everything Is Racist: Spins the investigation into his corruption into an inspiring narrative of his own victimization at the hands of villainous whiteys and Uncle Toms in the State's Attorney's office. Depressingly, it works.
Gus Haynes: 45 inches of Clay Davis playing not just the race card but the whole deck, coming at ya.
Faux Affably Evil: Keeps the veneer of amicability of a snake oil salesman. It usually falls the moment things start to go against him.
Feigning Intelligence: Brings a copy of Prometheus Bound, by Aeschylus, to his trial. He tells reporters that he relates to this story of a man punished by the Powers That Be for helping the people - and in the process mispronounces both Prometheus and Aeschylus, suggesting that he has never read or discussed the book.
Alternatively, his mispronunciation of the two names might be deliberate posing, in order to make him more relatable to his largely un- or undereducated voter base.
Flat Character: Even though he has a very big screen presence and a lot of screen time, Clay Davis has very little depth as a character. He has no moral complexity (he's just corrupt), and he's never shown caring about anyone else which even Levy or The Greek are capable of. Even his Freudian Excuse of coming from the projects is not explored at all.
Freudian Excuse: It's implied when he tells Avon that he grew up in the streets surrounded by crime and he chose politics become it was the best option. Of course, it could have all been a lie to try to butter up Avon, but some of the similarities between Davis and Namond Brice does suggest that there was a hint of truth to what Davis said.
Jerkass: Maintains a slimy, non-confrontational persona most of the time, but he breaks his façade sometimes during his rants, for instance, when Daniels doesn't cave in, Davis calls him a motherfucker whilst he is in the room, among other insults.
Jerkass Has a Point: Sleazebag he is, he points out to Stringer Bell that if he still has the mentality of "your man must be as good as his word", then he is definitely not ready to join the big leagues of White-Collar Crime.
Clay is right that he has had influence in Ervin Burrell being bumped up the ranks to become Commissioner and that Burrell not doing anything to help Clay is unfair, at least within the context of "backroom deal morality".
Karma Houdini: Not only he escapes punishment, but his position is also reinforced after he's acquitted.
First Deputy: You city sons of bitches have managed, in a single week, to transform Clay fucking Davis into Martin Luther King Jr.
Large Ham: Especially theatrical by season 4.
Laughably Evil: Norman can't help but laugh at how audacious his attempts to rip off Carcetti are and breaks down into a laugh when he starts mocking his "Sheeeeeeeeiiiiiiit".
Manipulative Bastard: When he is put on in Season 5, he easily charms the Baltimore jury into believing that his theft of money from his charity organizations was for a good cause, and is acquitted.
The One Who Made It Out: Clay tells Avon during a meeting in the club that he came from the projects too but became a politician.
Playing Both Sides: What's better than soliciting bribes from a political candidate? Soliciting bribes from two.
Playing the Victim Card: In the stairs of the courtroom and then inside of it. He portrays himself as a man of the people who is like Prometheus, a victim of the vengeful gods in a Greek tragedy. Gus Haynes at the Baltimore Sun even lampshades this by saying Davis played "not just the race card but the whole deck."
Sleazy Politician: In addition to his criminality, he's pretty scummy in his personal life as well.
Slime Ball: An amalgamation of everything that's wrong inside the political machine.
Snake Oil Salesman: Solicits bribes from Stringer, promising to advance his real estate investments, but doesn't actually do anything once he gets them.
Levy: He rainmade you. A guy says if you pay him, he can make it rain. You pay him. If and when it rains, he takes the credit. If and when it doesn’t, he finds reasons for you to pay him more.
Tragic Villain: It's not explored in the show, but it's implied he had a tough upbringing living in the projects only to make out and become a Corrupt Politician to get ahead.
Verbal Tic: Addressing his victims as "partner". An intentional, reassuring pet word.
Villainous Breakdown: Delivers angry rants to his political cronies whenever he's under scrutiny. He loses it during Carcetti's term when he begins to realize he's sinking with no rope or allies in reach, but he quickly pulls himself together to present his usual slimy public persona.
Villain with Good Publicity: So good that it helps him get acquitted of fraud charges.