Actually Pretty Funny: Laughs heartily at Daniels' joke about the police promoting the wrong man, "all the time".
Affably Evil: He's an antagonistic force, but he's usually very civil at it and can be borderline compassionate at times, avoiding unnecessary harshness, unlike Rawls.
Authority in Name Only: He's seen as a "hack" by Mayor Clarence Royce, who plans on ousting him and replacing him with Deputy Commissioner Bill Rawls if he's reelected. Tommy Carcetti defeats Royce in the mayoral race, saving Burrell's job. Due to Burrell's failure to bring the matter of a murdered state's witness to the Mayor's attention before it became a campaign issuenote , Carcetti asks Burrell to resign. Burrell refuses and tells Carcetti that he would have to fire him and that if he leaves, he will not go quietly. Carcetti at the same time can't fire Burrell without having ready an African-American replacement due to the fact that Carcetti himself is a white mayor in a city with a majority black population. Finding a replacement is further complicated by a lack of ranking African-American officers in the department besides Burrell. There is only one African-American Deputy Commissioner named Hawthorne, who is over 70 years old, and no African-American officers over the rank of Colonel. The next highest ranking African-Americans in the department are Majors and Lieutenants, most of whom such as Major Reed are loyal to Burrell and his methods of policing. Carcetti decides to strip Burrell of his power as Commissioner and give all decision making up to Rawls, while leaving Burrell as a figurehead for the press and ministers.
Badass Boast: When Herc's latest wrongdoing puts a fresh Carcetti in a compromised position between the police force and the ministers, Burrell saves Carcetti's day by literally throwing the book (of regulations) at Herc. Burrell brags about the move beforehand.
Am I the only one who knows how to play this game?
Badass Bureaucrat: Though not to the extent of Rawls, he has shades of this, occassionally showing his managerial/political skills.
Blackmail:
Threatens to air Daniel's dirt to halt the Barksdale investigation, but Daniels calls his bluff: "If you wanted to do me, I'd be done already". Much later, he contemplates smearing Daniels to save his own skin, but Burrell is the one already done by that point and hands the dossier over to Nerese Campbell.
Facing the boot after the Hamsterdam scandal blows up, he warns the Mayor that he'll disclose "the truth", namely that he brought the matter to Royce's attention but had to sit on it, as the Mayor kept his hands tied for weeks (days, in reality). It works, and in turn, Colvin is forced to eat the full blame, quietly, or his officers will be persecuted.
On the receiving end when Valchek, unhappy about the detail of humps assigned to Sobotka, demands a proper detail lead by Daniels, unless Burrell wants to face an embarrassing vote of confirmation as Commissioner and more fallout from the Barksdale case, closed prematurely.
Book Dumb: Described as "stone stupid" by fellow Dunbar High School alumnus Prop Joe. Still smart enough to play the connections game.
Da Chief: For Daniels for most of the series, because of Daniel's unit sticking their noses into Burrell's associates at City Hall. He doesn't actually have Daniels fired though, out of fear of making an unflattering news story.
The Dilbert Principle: Played with. He is put in the position of Commissioner as a lackey to the mayor; as such, he is mostly the butt of all the blame the mayor wants to pin on him. To be fair, without him the police's statistics system wouldn't work at all. According to him, he does as he's told; however, judging by the way the system is set up he is right in asserting that his replacement is not bound to do any better nor there is any initiative for breaking of the vicious cycle, as Daniels later finds out.
Even Evil Has Standards:
Ervin Burrell goes ahead and comforts Kima's partner after the latter's shooting after he notices that Commissioner Frazier is unwilling to.
Burrell also thinks the fickle nature of politicians is a joke.
Evil Virtues: He's perceived as an obstructionist hack, but it's also evident that he possesses skills that helped him climb to his high position, displaying glimmers of leadership, assertiveness, management, interpersonal, and navigational skills. Sadly, these aptitudes are almost always utilized in a self-serving manner amidst political troubles
Hidden Depths: According to Proposition Joe, Burrell was in glee club in high school.
His final scene has him be surprisingly introspective and philosophical, accurately outlining the flaws in the police system and how for all his power, he never amounted to more than a Yes-Man to politicians who have no clue what police work actually entails but still feel entitled to tell cops how to do their work. He closes by telling Rawls that he will end up just the same with a sad tone of resignation, indicating that he did want to make a difference at some point before being forced into the same mindset as the politicians he works under.
It's All My Fault: Burrell remembers he's the one who wanted the buy/bust, which ultimately got Kima shot.
Jerkass: He is condescending towards Daniels in Season 1 over his leadership of Major Crimes and cruel to Major Colvin in Season 3 in punishing him for Hamsterdam.
Jerkass Has a Point: At the very end of his time in the BPD, as he is getting ready to leave his office for the last time he points out that no other public service/department gets completely interfered with by politicians the way that police do, and that the fickle nature of those politicians makes it impossible for the police to actually accomplish anything they're set to, and it's all compounded by the utter lack of knowledge that politicians have about the nature of policing. It doesn't change the fact that he's an Obstructive Bureaucrat who would rather make himself look good with rigged numbers than actually improve the city, but he definitely has a point.
To Carcetti, I'm a hack. Royce was no different. Maybe I am. But every day they send over a new priority.
"Go after the bad guys. No, change that. Make quality-of-life cases. Get on top of the murders. On second thought, run the whores out of Patterson Park."
You think the mayor tells the schools how to teach kids, or the health department how to do its job, or sanitation how to pick up trash? But get elected, and suddenly they know police work.
Just Following Orders: Threatens Royce with invoking this publicly during the Hamsterdam fracas. It's very effective. Generally speaking, he has internalized this line of thinking and attributes some degree of dysfunction to doing what he is told.
Kick the Dog: Burrell personally informs Johns Hopkins University of Colvin's involvement with Hamsterdam, making the University withdraw Colvin's job offer.
Mean Boss: Not a good one for job security.
I don't care how many years you have on this job. If the felony rates don't fall, you most certainly will.
My God, What Have I Done?: A possible interpretation of his reaction to learning the perp whose investigation he had Rawls sabotage had killed two-digits worth of people and hid them in the vacants.
Nothing Personal: Both ways. Carcetti says so when he picks on Burrell to attack the administration. Unlike Rawls or Valchek, Burrell doesn't hold grudges against most of his adversaries and even understands the reasons for their affronts, maintaining a civil relationship with Daniels, whom he despises, until his career in the force is finished, that is. He tries to play the the long game without closing doors unnecessarily. That said, he'll Kick the Dog if he has to, as Howard Colvin can bear witness to.
Obstructive Bureaucrat: As Deputy Ops, he puts a stop on Daniels several times and finally punishes him when the Lieutenant stops acting on his dictates. Once he's Commissioner, it's clear his stint in the post is more focused in defending the administration and its political agenda than in doing police work. While he's portrayed as an antagonist who is in cahoots with Clay Davis and the powerful elite, the show makes the point that even the man in charge has to dance to the tune of the system and can do very little to change it.
Office Golf: He's quite fond of playing it in some of his scenes. He is seen once playing actual golf too. Burrell holds one of his clubs in a threatening manner in one instance with Daniels.
Pet the Dog: A minor one, but when Commissioner Frazier refuses to talk to Kima's partner Cheryl when Kima is shot and in danger of dying, Burrell goes ahead and does so alone.
Put on a Bus: Burrell is forcibly retired and given a desk job in DC halfway through the final season.
Resigned in Disgrace: Carefully avoided by Burrell in season 5. The new mayor, Tommy Carcetti, was already planning to give Burrell the boot and promote Bill Rawls when a major scandal with the murder of a state's witness gives him ample opportunity to do so. However, Burrell refuses to resign and tells Carcetti that he will have to fire him, knowing that the white mayor replacing a black commissioner with his white deputy would look extremely bad in a majority-black city (the minority community leaders are willing to tolerate one or the other, but not both). Carcetti has to settle for making Burrell a figurehead still drawing a hefty salary for doing essentially nothing while Rawls runs the day to day operations. When Burrell does eventually resign he makes sure to leave with both his reputation and connections to Baltimore's power players intact, and part of the reason he does resign is because he's been bribed with a cushy job elsewhere.
Slave to PR: Outside of the office or the public life he isn't nearly as bad as he's known for. Put him in his uniform, though, and he becomes all hook-in-mouth.
Daniels: There ain't nothing you fear more than a bad headline, now, is there? You'd rather live in shit than let the world see you work a shovel.
Sleazy Politician: It's politics that got him to his current rank, and Burrell definitely knows how to play that game. Give him credit, he is good at using politics, for example the way he uses Internal Affairs to get Herc fired for Carcetti without making it look as though Carcetti is caving to the deacons is a very effective piece of work.
Smug Snake: A bit overconfident in his game playing and speaks to Daniels in a condescending tone in the Season 1 finale. As the show goes on, he finds himself a punching bag for many of the political figures and has to resign before the finale.
Vague Age: His age is never specified as he's played by Frankie Faison who was fifty-three when the show started but a toss away line from Prop Joe claims they were in school together despite Joe being played by Robert F Chew who is eleven years younger than Faison.
Villain Decay: Burrell is an intimidating antagonist in Season 1, threatening Daniels and having Carver as The Mole in Major Crimes. Season 2 sees him bullied into reassembling Major Crimes by Valchek, and Season 3 onwards has him a target by the various politicians in public settings. While he holds his own decently, he never reaches the intimidation he has in Season 1.
This is justified by him being promoted from Deputy Commissioner to Commissioner in Season 2, which, as he warns Rawls in his final appearance, carries a lot of responsibility and blame from politicians and public figures who don't really understand how a police department works.
We Used to Be Friends: With Rawls. Prior to Rawls making his play for the top job, they did genuinely seem to get along and made a good team for running the Department. But in his last scene, Burrell makes it clear their friendship is over and he uses his parting to words to kick Rawls where it hurts: reminding Rawls that he's just keeping the commissioner's chair warm for Daniels.