All for Nothing: Everything Frank worked for is completely destroyed by the end of Season 2
Anti-Villain: The smuggling he enables is instrumental to Baltimore getting the drug supplies it does, and ultimately brings down the whole union because of its illegality, but he only ever turned to it to keep his friends and union brothers employed and able to feed their families.
I know I was wrong. But in my head, I thought I was wrong for the right reasons.
Armor-Piercing Response: Gets one from Nick later in the season concerning Ziggy.
Frank: You're his cousin, how could you not know what was happening?
Nick: You're his father!
Culturally Religious: Frank is a regular churchgoer and treats religion as an integral tenet of the Polish-American culture, but when Father Lewandoski suggests a confession he considers it for a moment before laughing it off, suggesting he's not too serious about it.
Dartboard of Hate: His office has one with the face of Bob Irsay, the owner of the Colts who moved them from Baltimore to Indianapolis.
Deal with the Devil: He's in league with The Greek to get the funds needed to lobby for the expansion of the ailing docks.
Defiant to the End: When his body is found, it has defensive wounds on the hands. No one doubts he fought like hell against his murderers
Everyone Has Standards: While he knows he's helping the Greeks smuggle some dirty stuff, he's furious when he discovers actual people were being smuggled, and it's clear the Greeks didn't tell him because he might have objected and complicated the relationship.
Also, in a series where basically anyone with any power is cheating on their partner, he's never suggested to be anything but loyal to his wife.
Fatal Flaw: An absolute refusal to admit defeat. While he's doing the best he can, anyone with a little perspective would admit the best thing he can do for the longshoremen long-term is encourage them to start transitioning to the other trades while he keeps the docks open as long as he can. Instead, he's fighting a hopeless one-man war to somehow make them legitimate for another decade, when everything around him is clearly crumbling.
A Father to His Men: His first priority is always providing for his union men. When one of his guys comes hat in hand saying he's about to leave, he tells him to go down to the bar and ask for "a shot and a beer courtesy of Frank Sobotka" and the guy gets slipped several thousand to keep him afloat. That Nick is seen doing the same an episode later implies he does this regularly.
I Did What I Had to Do/Well-Intentioned Extremist: Frank does everything he can to save the docks, but essentially sells his soul to do so.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Jaded, rough, brash, gruff and aloof to his son but deep down a very decent man.
Job-Stealing Robot: Attends a presentation showing how much automation is "simplifying" the longshoreman process, which of course terrifies him because that means no jobs for his guys.
Killed Offscreen: As he drives to meet the Greeks, the FBI mole informs them just when Frank arrives that Sobotka has a proffer scheduled with the authorities. The moment he exits the car, he's walking to his death. Fade to black, end of the episode. The next one opens with the discovery of his body.
Perp Walk: Invoked by Valchek, whose sole purpose in the case is to ruin Sobotka. While everyone else is arrested during the initial raid, the cops assigned to take Frank are told to wait until he's at the union office, and once they've gone in they wait until a suitably sizeable press gang has assembled before Valchek personally walks him out to the car.
Shoot the Shaggy Dog: His story is a heavy-hitting tragedy. In the end he's killed by the Greeks, the work of his life goes down the drain, the union gets busted, the docks are mortally wounded and his family is damaged beyond repair.
I flushed my fucking family, for what!?
Sibling Yin-Yang: He's crooked and active in the union while his brother Louis is straight and retired.
Slave to PR: Is seen attending political events more than once in order to schmooze local politicians such as Clay Davis.
Suspicious Spending: While he repeatedly warns Ziggy and Nick about this and seems to generally avoid it (until you look closely at it, his union seems to have constant financial issues, he generally pays his personal bills late, etc.) he initially attracts Valchek's suspicion by making an extravagant donation for a church window which he shouldn't be able to afford.
Tragic Hero: On the one hand, Frank only takes dirty money to try and protect his profession and community for as long as possible, all while knowing the Greeks would get their cargo in somehow so he might as well be the one who did it and get paid. On the other hand, he also seems totally unwilling to truly grasp that his career is on the way out and that the best thing he can do for everyone is keep them employed long enough to get an education in an alternative trade so they can leave the game. By his own admission to his lawyer, even if he gets everything he wants - which is truly a long shot at best - in five years there aren't going to be jobs for most of them. The ship is sinking, he hasn't even suggested cracking the lifeboats yet. In another time and place in American life, Frank Sobotka would've been a giant; a community figure with real power and influence instead of a worn out man desperately trying to hold on to what little place he and his kind still have in the world.
Tragic Mistake: His face-off with Valchek in his second episode, which is emblematic of his character as a whole. When Valchek comes pressing him about a donation he made to the church first, Frank has an opportunity to defuse the tension and not engage with someone as petty as him. Instead, he goes on a long tirade talking about how everyone he knew growing up has always hated Valchek and he sure isn't gonna start treating with him now. This pisses off Valchek enough that he forms the unit that eventually busts Frank's life apart.
When You Coming Home, Dad?: He's a terrible dad, in large part responsible for Ziggy's dysfunction. On the one hand, he's made sure Ziggy's had a job at the docks as an adult, which provided a steady job in theory. On the other hand, he doesn't insist Ziggy is actually good at his job, and refuses to actually fire him for being bad at it. The end result is that Ziggy treats everyone terribly and doesn't do his job right, and thus has a career that's going nowhere. And on top of that, Frank doesn't really pay attention to him personally, which means Nick - his already-busy cousin - and the longshoremen - hardly quality teachers - have ended up filling the gap instead and turned Ziggy into a community joke with no prospects.
Working-Class Hero: The picture of one. All he wants to do is keep his guys working, then hit the bar after work, just like his dad did, and his dad before him. But his turn to illegality and his refusal to expand into other working-class jobs - stevedore is hardly the only option - shows how this type can go wrong.
We used to make shit in this country, build shit. Now we just put our hand in the next guy's pocket.