Aesop Amnesia: At the end of season 1, he's seen lecturing a couple of rookies on the importance of "smart" detective work as opposed to haphazard violent busts. If this lesson ever truly sank in and he wasn't just posturing, it's all but forgotten in the following seasons. The closest thing we get to an explanation of why he didn't pay attention to that aesop is him exclaiming about what a hassle police paperwork is when he tries doing some property seizures in season 2, hinting that his distaste for the bureaucracy and the work that goes into actual smart policing nudged him back to his old ways of busting heads.
Authority in Name Only: No one respects his rank of sergeant, both because of the circumstances of his promotion and the fact he's an idiot. Lester ignores him when he asks to be the person briefing Major Crimes in Season 4 (because of his rank).
Bad Liar: When he accidentally reveals to Little Kevin that Randy talked to the police by revealing he knows Kevin didn't act alone which Kevin quickly picks up to mean Randy, Herc can only pause and avoid the subject with "I'm asking you questions, remember?". Kevin isn't fooled.
Bald Head of Toughness: He is bald starting from Season 2 and is the most violent member of Major Crimes. He is always eager to rough up the suspects and it's the only thing he has any competency at.
Boisterous Bruiser: A fun loving, not too bright foot soldier in the police department who always favors physical solutions to departmental problems, and clearly enjoys the physical side of the job above everything else.
Brooklyn Rage: Lombardozzi's New York accent was so blatant that the show eventually wrote it in that Herc was originally from the Big Apple, and there are few cops in the show more violent or prone to Police Brutality.
Butt-Monkey: His incompetence often lands him in very hot water and eventually (along with his dishonesty and thuggery), gets him fired. Even when he's right, his colleagues usually ignore him until someone competent can confirm it.
Catchphrase: "The Western district way."
Character Development: In the last season, after he has been kicked off the force and is working for Levy as a consultant, he privately admits to Carver that he realizes he was a useless, brutal police and wishes he'd tried to make a better go of it.
Cowboy Cop: Like McNulty, a deconstruction; in his case of the "cut corners and rough up the suspects" variety.
Dirty Cop: In Season 1, he is seen stealing money from a drug stash and throws some to Carver. He is not seen doing it again, but it's suggested it's something he does regularly. Ironically the first time money goes missing during a bust earlier in the season, Daniels tries to blame Herc and Carver, but they were actually innocent. It's possible Herc had a Then Let Me Be Evil moment after this or did this just to get back at Daniels.
Him stealing an expensive camera from the police equipment room without the approval of the court or his boss ends up being the reason he gets fired.
The Ditz: For all his asshole-ish attitude and knuckle-headedness, it's really hard to stay mad at the guy, though.
The Driver: His role in the Mayor's detail. This puts him in a very awkward spot when he comes to collect Royce and finds him in a pantless situation.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: Like Carver, he gets tired of doing lowly surveillance jobs and transfers away from the MCU, but unlike Carver, Herc earns little respect or knowledge and eventually comes back to the unit.
Dumb Muscle: A brute that approaches crimefighting with "the Western district way" motto; rounding up corners, knocking heads and a complete lack of subtlety, in a nutshell.
Everyone Has Standards: Appalled by the downward spiral of Hamsterdam with events such as the police having to hide a murder committed inside of the free zone, he blows the whistle and informs a reporter.
Face–Heel Turn: After being fired from the BPD and taking a job as an investigator with Levy he becomes something of a Punch-Clock Villain. Ironically, being fired from the BPD makes him undergo at least some introspection and Character Development that makes him tone down some of his previous faults, but his new job also makes him a minor antagonist, and he is indirectly responsible for Levy being able to free Marlo.
Foil: Not initially, but he becomes this to Carver. They start out similar, both being immature and irresponsible, but over time Carver grows and becomes more responsible, while Herc does not.
I Know You Know I Know: He finally makes sergeant thanks to it. When detailed with the Mayor, he awkwardly surprises Royce in the middle of getting a blowjob from his secretary. After being counseled by Valchek, Royce and Herc reach an implicit agreement about his silence and the Mayor gets him a promotion and transfer with a single phone call.
Irony:
For all the idiotic screwups he is responsible for throughout season 4 (losing the police camera, revealing Randy's identity, abandoning Bubbles...), the thing that galvanizes the mayor and police brass to find any way possible to fire him is something that wasn't entirely his fault. (Roughing up and searching a minister's car based on a false tip from Bubbles.)
After all his years as a cop where he refused to learn the nuances of the lives of criminals or build community relations, as Levy's investigator his greatest strengths are knowing the nuances of the BPD and ability to maintain relations with them and get the cops to spill details about what is going on inside the department.
Jerkass: An abrasive, crass, immature cop who lives to get physical with suspects and makes a racist faux pas when wrongfully detaining a black minister. That last one makes the ministers complain and demand his head for his actions.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: As dimwitted, crass, blunt, and brutal as he can be, he's not without Pet the Dog moments.
Apologizes to Bodie's grandmother for the inconvenience and foul language they used after the police come blazing into her house.
For all his failings, when Internal Affairs descends on his department, he takes the fall himself, instead of trying to save himself by lying, trying to get the others in the unit to cover for him (impossible under the circumstances, and if they had tried it likely would have meant at least a hit to their careers as well), or attempting to blame someone else.
He supports Carver in his decision to bubble Colicchio to IID after Colicchio attacks a civilian for no reason. While Herc acknowledges that the act won't go over well with some rank and file cops, he encourages Carver to do what he thinks is right, regardless of what those cops say or think. At the same time Herc voices regret for having been a violent and incompetent cop.
Karma Houdini: He was an aggressive and lousy cop, which ultimately costs him his job when he pisses off the wrong people, but he ends up making far more money in his new job at Levy's law firm. Levy eventually invites him to have dinner with his family, and with Levy's connections, Herc has a very bright future ahead of him as a bodyguard or private detective for the city's wealthiest.
The Load: At the beginning of the show he and Carver are far and away the least competent detectives among the major characters; Daniels only trusts them to do surveillance work and half the time they can't even manage that. Carver eventually gets better, Herc doesn't.
Loose Lips: When interrogating Little Kevin, Herc gives too much information about his supposed leverage (having an eyeball witness that connected Kevin to Lex's murder) and allows Kevin to figure out that Randy snitched.
Manchild: At times even more immature than some of the hoppers.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: More than once, but his interrogation of Little Kevin, in which he lets slip that Randy talked to the police and thereby ruins Randy's life, is the worst.
Not Even Bothering with the Accent: His Bronx accent sticks out like a sore thumb; in season five there's finally a spoken acknowledgment that he's originally from New York.
The Peter Principle: He wasn't exactly competent as a detective, but at times he could be a decent foot soldier, and was useful for simple tasks, and if he screwed those simple tasks up (as he sometimes did) the repercussions were generally minimal. Once promoted to Sergeant and sent back into the field, his screw ups have much bigger ramifications and he is no longer Beneath Notice as far as the bosses are concerned. In record time he manages to piss off pillars of the community, wreck a young man's life, lose police equipment that he took without proper authorization, and cause a minor political crisis for the mayor himself. This quickly results in Herc being dismissed from the BPD.
Police Are Useless: You could fill several pages detailing his many screw-ups over the course of the show.
Police Brutality: Most of the cops on the show engage in at one point or another, but Herc is more guilty of police brutality than most; brutality complaints are one of the main reasons he's not promoted to sergeant despite scoring well on the exam.
Daniels: ...a formal brutality charge, which for Herc will make an even four in the last two years.
Herc: None sustained...
Daniels: But all of them true.
Punch-Clock Villain: After he gets kicked from the police force, he goes to work for Maurice Levy as an investigator and helps get Marlo Stanfield a walk on the charges against him. But he's still friends with Carver and it's clear he just likes having a good paying job with perks. Also, even though Levy is using him to buy drinks of his former cop friends to pump them for information, it's also something Herc enjoys doing.
Rank Up: He scores surprisingly well on the Sergeant exam, but does not get a promotion until the mayor kicks him upstairs after Herc witnesses him in a delicate situation.
Those Two Guys: With Carver.
Took a Level in Dumbass: He gets progressively stupider as the seasons go by. Season 1 seems to teach a lesson about the importance of subtle police work, but it all goes down hill from there.
Villainous Friendship: After his crucial role in the Stanfield case, Levy invites him to his inner circle and starts to treat Herc like "family".
Villain with Good Publicity: He is kicked from the police force after many years of being a brutal cop and a screwup, but he mentions to Levy in Season 5 that he still has lots of friends in the police, and many of the rank-and-file cops think he was screwed over by the system, the bosses, and the politicians, basically seeing him as a police martyr.