Action Girl: She fights crime in a rather literal sense and isn't averse to jumping into the fray or tuning up prisoners.
All Lesbians Want Kids: Zig-zagged. Kima is talked into having a child with her girlfriend, but is completely unenthusiastic about it, which ultimately causes their separation. In season 5, she starts to regret her decision and spends more time with the child.
Babies Make Everything Better: Averted; Kima's girlfriend having a baby makes their relationship worse, and eventually contributes to their breakup. Kima does come to care for her son, however.
Blood Knight: She doesn't find police work satisfying unless she has the chance to forcefully confront and bust criminals face-to-face.
Butch Lesbian: Kima is open with her colleagues about her sexual orientation, although the womanizing McNulty tries to hit on her before she tells him.
By-the-Book Cop: The closest thing to one on this show, as evidenced by her refusal to testify that she saw that Wee-Bey was the second gunman when she gets shot in Season 1 and her blowing the whistle on Freamon and McNulty in season 5; however, she still gets in on a little extracurricular brutality and other inappropriate conduct at times.
Can Always Spot a Cop: Averted. When she goes undercover with Orlando, she completely convinces the various Barksdale soldiers, even Wee-Bey, that she's one of Orlando's stripper girls. This nearly causes her death, as Little Man shoots her without hesitation so that there will be no witnesses to Orlando's execution, when they probably would have backed off on the hit if they had known she was a cop.
Consummate Professional: She takes her work very seriously, and does well no matter where she is, be it Narcotics, Major Crimes, or Homicide.
Deliberate Values Dissonance: While Kima is an excellent cop in many ways, and perhaps the most By The Books of the cast, both when Bodie knocks down Mahone, and when Bird just curses everyone out in the interrogation room, she is willing and ready to partake in a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown, in the latter case, of a suspect handcuffed to a table. She also cheats on her wife, and they separate partially because she has the makings of a absent mother.
Fair Cop: Despite — or perhaps because of — her butch attitude, Kima is quite good-looking and attracts the attention of both men and women.
The Fettered: A big part of her personality is her unwillingness to lie for her fellow cops. She refuses to budge when Bunk tries to get her to identify Wee-Bey as one of her shooters, and she is the one that blows the whistle on the serial killer conspiracy.
Henpecked Husband: A lesbian example. A consequence of being the masculine half of her relationship. Lampshaded by Herc but also downplayed since Kima generally doesn't listen to her girlfriend.
Honor Before Reason: Her refusal to falsely testify that she knows for a fact that it was Wee-Bey who shot her when she is only mostly sure.
The Lad-ette: She enjoys drinking, screwing, snarking, and busting heads as much as any of her male co-workers; conversely, she doesn't have much interest in "feminine" activities like shopping or homemaking.
David Simon: Largely, I write her as a man and then, I confess, its Sonja Sohn who adds all the subtlety in her performance.
Married to the Job: Her partner begins to resent her dedication to policework when it detracts from her willingness to be a parent to their child.
Ms. Fanservice: She is very conventionally attractive and has multiple sex scenes in the first few seasons.
Naïve Newcomer: When she lands in homicide, she experiences a number of novice-related pranks from the veteran cops. The audience surrogate part is downplayed, as this happens in Season 4. Also, while she is one of the better officers in Narcotics in season 1, she is unaware of both Avon Barksdale, and of Omar's big brother No-Heart Anthony, the latter to the dismay of her snitch Bubbles.
"Not So Different" Remark: At one point in Season 3 while doing some late-night drinking commiserating with Jimmy McNulty she makes one of these remarks to him, having recognized their many similarities not just at work (natural police, enormous dedication to the job, jumping through hoops to work around the police bureaucracy and obstructive bosses) but also in their flawed personal lives. (At this point Kima is straining her relationship with Cheryl much like Jimmy wrecked his relationship with his ex-wife Elena, she's drinking too much and sleeping around too much, including taking tips from McNulty himself on how to have police partners cover for infidelities, etc.) She eventually tones down the worst aspects of these similarities and never winds up going as self-destructive as McNulty does.
Kima: Don't tell me I'm the same kind of asshole?
McNulty: [laughing] Pucker up, girlfriend!
Kima: Jesus. I'm turning into McNulty.
She Cleans Up Nicely: When she is posing as a criminal's girlfriend for a sting operation, she brings out her femme side and draws admiring comments from her male colleagues.
Twofer Token Minority: As a mixed black/Korean lesbian, she ought to count as a threefer, but in this case it's an aversion since the show realistically portrays the demographic makeup of Baltimore and she's not the only black, the only lesbian, or the only female police around.