The Ace: Subtle, but he's an elite investigator with a very wide range of talents, can play the role of a conman and put on accents, he has high social skill, which helps him in the job but also scoring with the ladies, and his manual ability and patience with his dollhouse furniture nets him an income superior to his own wage.
Almighty Janitor: A regular detective working secretly inside a closet and from an abandoned warehouse brings the crime lord of Baltimore down. He single handedly orchestrates a city-wide operation and then matter-of-factly debriefs the Deputy Ops about it as if Daniels were a subordinate.
Awesomeness by Analysis: In Daniels' words, he is by himself the Major Crimes Unit.
Badass Boast: Near the end of the show, he wags a clock to Marlo's face to point out he has triumphed over the drug lord and cracked the code.
Me? I'm just a police.
Badges and Dog Tags: Although it's only brought up once or twice, Freamon served in the Army, and uses that experience to teach Shardenne how to walk so that her steps will always be the same distance, this way they can get precise measurements for the inside of the Barksdale headquarters in Orlando's. He's a little put off that none of the other detectives in the MCU served, muttering that they're "a bunch of draft dodging peace freaks."note 
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Eccentricities such as his habit of painting dollhouse furniture at his desk lead the others to assume he's a hump; he's anything but.
The Chessmaster: Probably the smartest of the police on the whole show, including McNulty and Daniels.
Con Man: He plays the role of one to fool a savvy street felon and further his wiretapping operation in season 3. He succeeds at selling the Barksdale Organization pre-wiretapped burner phones.
Cool Old Guy: Natural police. Occasionally mounts up and shows his prowess during field operations, for instance when he punks Bird with a bottle, and is the only character able to dominate, blackmail and outcon Clay Davis.
Cowboy Cop: Though he's much smarter and more careful about it than McNulty or Herc.
Cultured Badass: He became highly knowledgeable in furniture styles, particularly classics and antiques, by virtue of his having taken up dollhouse furniture making as a side business while working in the Pawn Shop Unit. The hobby has also made him fairly well-off.
Deadpan Snarker: Has a poignant remark for almost everything, usually with a cynical flavour.
Do Wrong, Right: When Bunk brings Lester in to talk some sense into McNulty's regarding his "serial killer" scheme, Lester apparently reacts with a What the Hell, Hero?, not because what McNulty's doing is outright illegal, but because the plot is weak and needs to be sensationalized.
Forensic Accounting: One of his specialties, usually met with a stern opposition from the higher-ups, since drug money funds political campaigns. The few times he can use it, he compares it to a Boom, Headshot!.
You follow drugs and you find drug addicts and drug dealers, you follow the money and you don't know where the fuck it's gonna take you.
Guile Hero: Very subtle and very good at making other people dance to his tune. For instance, he often addresses Daniels as Cedric, in a paternalist, almost condescending way to make Daniels do what Lester asks.
Happy Ending: He’s drummed out of the police force but seems to have no regrets. He gets to retire comfortably on a thirty-year service veteran’s pension and his lucrative side business money with his loving, beautiful girlfriend.
Head Butting Heroes: When McNulty keeps investigating Stringer Bell on his own, Lester is compliant out of loyalty to Daniels and happy to do actual police work after years in terrible units. They nearly come to blows when McNulty appeals to Lester's pride and dares him to be police and Freamon berates Jimmy for being a selfish jackass pissing on the unit he himself created. Hilariously, they both give themselves food for thought.
Insistent Terminology: Worked the pawn shop unit for 13 years.
and 4 months
The Last DJ: He endangered his career to make sure that he closed a case, not caring about the fact that he was involving a politically connected fence, or that he probably could have closed the case without involving said fence. His punishment was his ignominious exile to the pawn shop unit.
May–December Romance: Starts up a relationship with the much younger Shardene which continues through the end of the show.
The Mentor: To Prez and (to a lesser extent) Kima.
Obfuscating Stupidity: When everyone refers to the humps on the first season detail, they refer to Polk, Mahone and Lester; little do they know...
Parental Substitute: Daniels jokes about how Lester invokes this, exploiting his Team Dad status to have his way by exploiting the guilty feelings of his younger protegees/disciples.
Daniels: He stares at you over the top of his reading glasses, with that look that says I'm the father you never had, and I don't want to be disappointed in you ever again.
Reassigned to Antarctica: Pawnshop unit after charging a politically connected fence in 1989 while working at Homicide. Thirteen years (and four months).
Second Episode Introduction: A major and justified example. Buried in the pawnshop unit, he's miles away from police work, unlike the officers from homicide and narcotics. Absent in the pilot, he first shows up with the dead wood that is dumped into Daniel's detail in the second episode.
Sherlock Scan: He figures out how Marlo is disposing of his victims immediately when he notices unusual nails in the boarded-up doorway of a vacant house.
Smart People Wear Glasses: His glasses help to underscore that he's one of the smartest detectives out there.
Team Dad: He is the oldest detective in the unit and is always imparting his acquired wisdom to anybody who cares to listen. Daniels even comments that Lester exploits this in a paternalistic way to get what he wants.
The Vietnam Vet: Said to have fought in the Vietnam War, but is almost never brought up in the show. Upon learning that he's the only veteran assigned to the MCU, he's visibly unamused.
"Draft-dodging peace freaks, huh?"