Assassin Outclassin': Does this to Snoop, who had orders to kill him for being a suspected CI in the case against Marlo but tells Mike they're going to kill someone else for that reason. But he gets suspicious when Snoop first tells him not to bring a gun, then while driving to the supposed target says she'll give him a gun when they get to the location. Mike ultimately gets the drop on her by pretending to need to pee so she'll pull into an alley.
Badass Adorable: A middle school student who stares down Marlo Stanfield. Marlo is suitably impressed and starts looking to recruit Michael afterward.
Beware the Nice Ones: Michael's a good and loyal friend who rarely starts trouble and is mostly The Quiet One, but he's vicious in a fist fight and becomes skilled with firearms after becoming part of the Stanfield gang.
Big Brother Instinct: He diligently takes care of his brother and protects him from his sexually abusive stepfather.
Cool Big Bro: One of the few people Michael is openly affectionate with is his younger brother, who he is deeply loyal and loving to.
Combat Pragmatist: He's only able to get the drop of Snoop cause Snoops was least expecting him to sense his imminent execution.
Dark and Troubled Past: He was molested by his step-father and grew up with an Addled Addict of a mother. As a result, Michael have problems with being open about his emotions, and he greatly distrust authority figures in general, and older men in particular.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Melancholic (with Namond, Randy, and Dukie).
Hates Being Touched: A consequence of having been molested by his step-father. With the exception of a few people like his brother, just about any time that someone goes to touch Michael he jerks away from it or becomes visibly uncomfortable.
History Repeats: Becomes a stick up man like Omar. In fact, the last thing we see him do is shoot Vinson in the knee while robbing him, just like we saw Omar shoot a resisting target in the knee during Omar's first robbery in Season 1.
Horrible Judge of Character: He distrusts the reformed Cutty because he finds him "too friendly", as a result of his backstory. Rather than go to a responsible adult with his problem, he falls in with the sociopathic Marlo Stanfield.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: Michael showed early promise as a boxer. However the circumstances of his life meant that he never really had a chance and had to get out of training to support himself and Bug.
I Just Want My Beloved to Be Happy: After the Stanfield Organization turns on him, he sends his brother Bug off to their aunt along with all the money he has, (with the promise of more to come) so that Bug will be safe and away from the game.
Kick the Dog: Kenard may be a little shit, but seeing Michael pound on a kid half his size over and over again is still disturbing.
Nerves of Steel: Despite the many stressful situations he's put under he only shows fear once in the series, when Omar visits his corner for a friendly chat at gunpoint. (He is nervous that Omar will recognize him from being part of a Stanfield ambush and likely is also fearful about forced into close contact with a Gayngster due to his childhood molestation.) Still doesn't break, though.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: On Kenard, when Namond catches Kenard trying to steal Namond's drug package. Namond is so disturbed by the sight that he refuses to take the package from an unconscious Kenard afterward.
Pet the Dog: Diligently takes care of his little brother and Dukie, and he stands up for Randy when a couple of kids accuse Randy of being a snitch.
Pre-Mortem One-Liner: Set up by Snoop:
Snoop: How my hair look, Mike?
Michael: You look good, girl.
Promotion to Parent: Michael was essentially functioning as a parent to his younger brother when he first appeared on the show because his mother was consumed by her addiction. This goes up another couple of notches when he moves Bug out of his mother's house and they start living on their own in Season 5.
Properly Paranoid: Ultimately lets him kill Snoop before she can kill him, since she told him not to bring a gun when she pretends to take him along to kill another target.
Protagonist Journey to Villain: Most likely Journey to Anti-Villain, since Michael appears to be taking over Omar's role as a Karmic Thief, but he moves from a tough but good-hearted schoolboy to a hardened thief with blood on his hands.
Rape as Backstory: Michael is implied to have been molested by his stepfather. It surfaces several times in his social interactions, where he clearly has an exceptionally hard time trusting and even just being emotionally open around adult men.
Real Men Hate Affection: Much like Hates Being Touched, as a result of being sexually abused by his stepfather. As a result of the molestation and the whole thing being covered up by his mother, Michael has a difficult time handling or expressing affection for others, particularly other men. He eventually leaves Cutty's gym in part because Cutty's attempts to be kind and mentorly to him make Michael uncomfortable, and even with Bug and Dukie, Michael sometimes has a difficult time being truly openly or affectionate. He does have a romantic relationship with a girl at one point, but it's implied to be a one-night stand.
Surpassed the Teacher: Michael manages to see through Snoop's plan to kill him, by way of the lessons he has learned about setting up an assassination from her and Chris, leading him to instead turn the tables on her and kill her instead.
Staring Down Cthulhu: Stares down Marlo in one of his earliest scenes.
The Stoic: Michael tends to keep his feelings to himself and seldom show what he's thinking or feeling.
Took a Level in Badass: Started off as just another kid on the block. He toughens up with boxing and Marlo's tutelage so much he becomes the "new Omar".
Tragic Bigot: Subverted. He tells his friends that he’s worried Cutty might be a “faggot,” which suggests that he’s prejudiced against gay men as a result of being molested by his Depraved Bisexual stepfather. However, it becomes evident that he isn’t actually homophobic seeing as he never uses such language again, never antagonizes gay people, and respects Omar enough to follow in his footsteps.
Two First Names: "Lee" can also be used as a first name.
Underestimating Badassery: One of the reasons why Michael constantly succeeds and gets the better of others is that people around him underestimate his toughness or his intelligence, often because of his youth and seldom speaking/expressing himself. Snoop and Vinson pay the highest price for doing so, as Michael sees through Snoop's plan to kill him and kills her instead, and Vinson gets kneecapped when he dismisses Michael as a threat.
Unwinnable Training Simulation: Part of his training is facing off with experienced professional killers Chris and Snoop with paintball guns that look like real handguns. Despite his complete lack of experience at that point, he wins anyway.
Young Gun: His training session with Chris and Snoop shows that Michael has the ability to be quite a dangerous fighter, he just needs experience and to become hardened to it. By the end of the series, he's got both of those, and is on his way to acquiring a reputation reminiscent of Omar's.
Would Hurt a Child: 14-year old Michael is technically a child himself, but the fact that he would pound Kenard again and again is an example, due the latter's smaller size and younger age. However it's Downplayed because while he's perfectly happy beating one, as shown by the massacre at Junebug's house he refuses to kill one.