Affably Evil: He's as friendly and polite as a thief and murderer can be. He intimidates and steals from street dealers, but has a code of honor, takes his grandmother to church, refuses to swear, treats his boyfriends well and refuses to hurt those not involved in "the game".
Anti-Hero: He robs drug dealers, has killed others and his actions have lead to other's deaths. But he lives by a strict code and will never harm someone who is not in the game. Hell, he never curses in a show filled with foul mouths.
Anti-Villain: He's a criminal who only steals from other criminals. He's extremely personable, witty, badass, a Friend to All Children, and lives by a strict code of conduct that includes never swearing and never stealing from or harming anyone not involved in the criminal underworld, not even when they see him committing a crime and it could possibly result in him being arrested or convicted as a result. He even spreads around some of the profits of his robberies to others in the neighborhood. He's still a thief who has killed or crippled many of his targets during the course of his thefts, and, as the show points out, is part of Baltimore's Vicious Cycle of crime and decay, especially since the children that Omar is so charitable towards idolize him and aim to imitate him, which will someday get them caught in the cruel world of The Game.
Arch-Enemy: Eventually becomes one to Stringer Bell, who, as Omar later discovers, was the one to order Brandon's brutal torture and murder. While the rest of the Barksdale Organization have good reason for wanting Omar dead, seeing as he regularly targeted them even before Brandon's death, the enmity between him and Stringer becomes deeply personal on both sides. Stringer even goes so far as to ignore Baltimore's venerated Sunday truce to try and assassinate Omar, a move out of step with his usual pragmatism and one which stuns even Avon and Slim Charles.
Badass Boast: Quite fond of them.
"'Ey, yo, lesson here, Bey: You come at the king, you best not miss!"
"Omar don't scare."
(During a Mexican Standoff with Mouzone) "From this range? With this caliber? Even if I miss, I can't miss!"
(After instructing Marlo to hand over his valuables at gunpoint) "Boy, you got me confused with a man who repeats himself!"
"You workin' a Stanfield corner, which means you workin' for a straight up punk! Ya' feel me? I'm out here in these streets every day, me and my lonesome, and where he at? Huh? A'yo, ya'll put it in his ear, Marlo Stanfield is not a man for this town, ya' digg?"
"Now you make sure you tell ol' Marlo I burned the money. Cause this ain't about that paper, it's about me hurtin' his people, messin' with his world. Tell that boy he ain't man enough to come down to the street with Omar!"
Badass Longcoat: He uses a duster to conceal his Kevlar vest and double-barreled shotgun while robbing drug dealers.
Bald Head of Toughness: Without a doubt one of the toughest characters in the series, and goes bald starting in season 4.
Battle Couple: With each of his boyfriends.
Breakout Character: Initially slated to appear in only seven episodes before being killed off, Omar proved so popular with fans and critics alike that the writers changed his arc to make him a major character throughout the show's run. Although David Simon denies that there was ever any plan to kill him off in season 1
Broken Pedestal: Kenard's, who is first seen wanting to play Omar in a game with some other kids; when he eventually meets him face-to-face, Omar is smashed up and limping on a crutch after his Super Window Jump, and Kenard seems decidedly unimpressed and disappointed. He then trails him to a shop and shoots him in the back, looks shocked at what he's done, and runs away.
But Not Too Gay: He never gets a sex scene and over three boyfriends and five seasons, only has three on-screen kisses. However, he does have a fairly steamy make-out scene with Dante, which goes beyond what almost any other show was depicting at the time, and he does very frequently appear shirtless; also, Episode 3 of Season 4 opens with him waking up naked in bed with Renaldo, and yes, you do get a (brief) shot of his front.
Byronic Hero: Reflective, smart, ruled by his tailor-made code yet often suffers at the hands of the game, causes problems for the (good and bad) police and is a morally grey character. Whether he's an anti-heroic or anti-villainous example is up in the air, which is kinda the point.
The Casanova: He apparently has boys everywhere.
Catchphrase: Downplayed with "Indeed" and "No doubt."
Characterization Marches On: In an issue of Early-Installment Weirdness, he casually curses in his very first scene in the series. After a scene in episode three where he chides his lover Brandon for using "ugly language," it becomes a character trait that he never swears.
Chastity Couple: Omar and Renaldo are not shown so much as holding hands, in comparison to Omar's being shown as affectionate with his first two boyfriends. The fact that they were tortured to get to him probably has something to do this detachment.
Clear My Name: After the Stanfield organization frames him for murder. The exoneration process is more difficult for Bunk since Omar is guilty of other murders.
Deadpan Snarker: He's witty and sarcastic.
"Bird, really know how to bring it out in people". On hearing Bird receive a no holds barred beatdown from Daniels, Landsman and Greggs.
"Do tell!". When told he is on Barksdale territory during a raid.
Death Seeker: One interpretation of his Roaring Rampage of Revenge against Marlo Stanfield in the final season. In the earlier seasons, Omar could be reckless, but he was also very methodical and cool-headed. At this point, however, Omar has been hurt both physically and psychologically to a point where he's thrown all sense of caution to the wind and seems more focused on inflicting as much damage on the Stanfield gang as possible despite this approach painting him as an easy target. This uncharacteristic behavior persists right up until the point where Omar is finally killed by Kenard. It's as if he was just waiting for someone to put him down for good.
Don't Tell Mama: His grandmother thinks he works at an airport cafeteria.
The Dreaded: Hearing his whistling makes dealers run in fear. He's so feared he can walk down the streets unarmed and criminals still flee in terror from him or just toss him their drugs and money.
Dropped a Bridge on Him: Done deliberately. He's such an epic badass that other hardened criminals are terrified of him, so of course he'll get a Dying Moment of Awesome where he goes down in a blaze of glory, right? Wrong. Shot from behind by an eleven year old while trying to buy a pack of cigarettes.
Dude Magnet: Omar is quite popular with men, as evidenced by his three boyfriends throughout the series. According to Bird, he had a "whole stable of boys" up in Jessup.
Dying Clue: At the scene of his death, Bunk finds Omar's hit list, which gives the police a list of names as to who composes Marlo's crew.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: He got his strict moral code from his grandmother and goes to church with her once a month.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: He's a remorseless stickup man who goes to church with his grandmother and goes ballistic whenever his loved ones or Butch is killed.
Everyone Has Standards: He may be stick-up man, but he has a strict moral code that involves not hurting anyone who is "not in the game" and not using profanity.
"A man got to have a code."
Expository Hairstyle Change: He has short, braided hair in the first three seasons. In the latter two, he's bald.
Famed in Story: Omar is the most fearsome stickup man in the projects and is still glorified even in death.
Fatal Flaw: Wrath, as well as his vengefulness. When someone does something to hurt him or his loved ones, he just can't let it go. It ultimately leads to his death.
The Fettered: Omar makes his living robbing drug dealers, but he prides himself on having a code of honor and never targets civilians.
Framing the Guilty Party:
Comes forward as a key witness against Bird, in retaliation for what happened to Brandon. Word on the street is that Omar was "in the Eastside sticking up some Ashland Avenue niggas" when Bird was killing a former witness.
McNulty: You really see him shoot the man?
Omar: You really asking?
Marlo has Chris kill a delivery woman in Old Face Andre's store and has Andre "identify" Omar to the police. Bunk is given a hard time by his peers when he tries to exonerate Omar, because as Bunk himself pointed out in the past, Omar is guilty of other unsolved murders (which were part of the game but made children glorify his violent ass and continue the game's vicious downward spiral.)
Friend to All Children: The first sign we get of him being more than the average criminal is him showing affection to the child of a dope fiend who has come to him seeking a free fix. On the streets of Baltimore, Omar walking down the street triggers cries of, "Omar's coming!" from the hoppers, but this is inverted in season five when we see him in retirement in Puerto Rico, giving neighborhood kids (who joyfully run up to him, shouting, "Omar!") some candy. Indeed, the fact that he believes Children Are Innocent leads to his death, when he dismisses eight-year-old Kenard as Just a Kid.
From Nobody to Nightmare: "Anthony, man, your brother ain't cut out for this shit."
Fun T-Shirt: "I am the American Dream."
Gayngster: One of the most famous in all media.
Good Scars, Evil Scars: Has a pretty distinctive antihero scar running down the left side of his face, which goes a long way towards solidifying him as a badass. Interestingly, that scar isn't a prosthetic—Michael K. Williams actually has a scar like that, which he got from a bar fight.
Gosh Dang It to Heck!: The only character who doesn't like to use profanity.
Gossip Evolution: The story of his death makes the rounds through the streets getting bigger and more epic each time it's told. When Michael tries to correct someone and tell what really happened, no one believes him. The result is that Omar becomes even more of a legendary figure and more Shrouded in Myth than he was when he was alive.
Guile Hero: While he can handle himself in a fight, Omar mostly survives on his intelligence, his tough nature, and often dumb luck.
Guns Akimbo: He wields two guns when he robs Marlo's poker game.
Handicapped Badass: For the latter half of season five. Deconstructed in that he can't do as many badass feats against the Stanfield Gang when compared to before he jumped out of the window.
Heartbroken Badass: Omar twice suffers this condition in the series. The first is after Brandon's death, and the second is after Butchie's.
Hidden Depths: He's clearly a lot more book smart than he lets on. Shows a good knowledge of Greek mythology, which he recalls from middle school, and he has fond memories of his student years. He was likely an intelligent boy who had no chance to pursue further education.
Horrifying the Horror: Drug dealers scare the bejesus out of normal people, for good reason. Omar scares the drug dealers so much that they give him money when he isn't even trying to rob them.
Ignored Epiphany: After a hit on a Barksdale stash house resulted in Tosha's death, Omar was gonna stop going after the Barksdales and let sleeping dogs lie. But then Stringer made the grave mistake of sending "discount hitmen" after him, while he was escorting his grandmother to church. Omar's decision to let go of his vendetta with the Barksdale gang goes out the window after that.
Omar: [To Dante and Kimmy] Y'all know I was gonna to walk away, right? Y'all know that, right?! I mean, after Tosha, I was gonna let those people be!
Dante: Avon home now.
Omar: Oh, Barksdale got to go! Stringer too! This thing got to end, man!
Important Haircut: He shaves off his cornrows between seasons three and four: right after he kills Stringer Bell and puts an end to his quest to avenge Brandon.
I Shall Taunt You: He purposely tries to push Marlo's Berserk Button to provoke Marlo into reckless action. Unfortunately Chris could see the ploy at work and made sure Marlo didn't learn about it.
It's Personal: Against the Barksdale organization (Stringer and Avon in particular) and later against Marlo Stanfield.
It Will Never Catch On: In one of the prequel shorts, we see a young Omar robbing a civilian at a bus stop with his older brother Anthony and a friend. When Omar is disgusted with the robbery and forces the older boys to return the man's money, the friend rolls his eyes and says to Anthony "Your brother not cut out for this shit." Yeah...
Just a Kid: Omar dismissed Kenard as a threat because he's a kid. Huge mistake.
Just Like Robin Hood: Partially, he robs for himself but shows generosity to those around him, including random junkies and their kids. His friendly-neighbourhood policy also works against any bounty put on his head, as he has silent and willing lookouts everywhere.
Karmic Thief: He steals exclusively from drug dealers and other criminals, refusing to harm or threaten anyone who isn't involved in the criminal underworld. The prequel focusing on him shows that this goes all the way back to when he was a Street Urchin, as he was so disgusted by a robbery that he and his older brother Anthony took part in, (stealing a few dollars from an ordinary working man at a bus stop) that he made Anthony give the money back at gun point.
Killed Mid-Sentence: "And give me one of them..."
Large Ham: Downplayed and just occasionally
When called to court, he enjoys a bit of grandstanding before the judicial audience, delivering grandiose lines like "I 'robbs' drug dealers".
He also indulges in some theatricality when dealing with Proposition Joe, bringing and collecting an actual clock to be fixed.
Leitmotif: Yo, Omar's comin'!. Omar whistles "The Farmer In The Dell" in a way that resembles a marching music. The tune sounds like the very relevant 'A-Hunting We Will Go'.
Let Off by the Detective: When Omar kills Stinkum, McNulty and Bunk quickly realize what happened. Since the murder charge would taint Omar's testimony against Bird, they lie to Cole, the investigator assigned to Stinkum's murder, about Omar's involvement so the case stays unsolved. At one point, they are turning a blind eye so blatantly that McNulty wonders out loud if they are still cops.
Living Legend: On the streets of Baltimore, Omar the Terror is simultaneously hated, feared and respected by everyone of note in the drug game. His reputation is so fearsome that even walking around unarmed in a silk robe has people fleeing for their lives, shouting warnings of his approach.
Lovable Rogue: He makes his living ripping off drug dealers and is constantly killing people. But he has a moral code of "all in the game" and he is just too lovable for the audience not to, well, love.
Magnetic Hero: Inspires fierce loyalty from a wide range of people, several of whom refuse to inform on him despite the threat of torture and death.
Manly Gay: Can't get much more manly than robbing drug dealers for a living. The series would actually accentuate this. Whenever Omar was about to have a big action moment, the makeup artists would cover Michael K. Williams in sweat.
Manly Tears: Omar cries a lot, and yet he is still never less than manly.
Never Hurt an Innocent: Drug dealers and street punks are fair game but taxpayers, aka civilians are strictly off limits in his code. According to a DVD extra, this is something he's been doing since he was a child, when his reaction to his older brother Anthony and Anthony's friend robbing a regular working man of the few dollars the guy had on him was to force them to give the money back at gun point.
Noble Demon: He is an unrepentant criminal, but he has a strict code of honor that involves never hurting anyone who isn't in the game.
Not Quite the Right Thing: It's a humanizing moment when he shows affection to the baby of a dope fiend, but giving free drugs to said dope fiend is still feeding into her addiction.
"Not So Different" Remark: When Omar appears in court to testify against Bird, Levy tries every trick he can think of to get the jury to discount and doubt Omar's (admittedly false) testimony, including trying to undermine the sympathy the jury has for Omar being a "good criminal" who only robs drug dealers and other criminals by claiming that Omar is just as much a part of the city's underworld and Baltimore's downward spiral as any "bad criminal". Omar is quick to retort that all of Levy's comments apply just as well to Levy himself, blowing a massive hole in Levy's attempts to malign Omar's character. Even Judge Phelan responds with a look that says that he believes Omar is right.
Levy: You are amoral, are you not? You are feeding off the violence and the despair of the drug trade. You're stealing from those who are stealing the life blood from our city. You are a parasite who leeches off-
Omar: Just like you, man.
Levy: -the culture of drugs... excuse me? Wha-
Omar: I got the shotgun. You got the briefcase. It's all in the game though, right?
Obfuscating Disability: He's able to get into a Barksdale stash house by pretending to be an old man in a wheelchair (with one of his crew pretending to be a nurse).
OOC Is Serious Business: After 4 seasons of making a point of eschewing profanity, we know he's playing for keeps when he tells Fat-Face Rick to spread the word that Marlo Stanfield is a "bitch."
Pet the Dog: He shows affection to the adorable baby of a dope fiend hitting him up for a free fix is the first sign that he's more than just a criminal. In season three, it's revealed that he also takes his grandmother to church once a month.
Put on a Bus: McNulty puts Omar on a bus to New York at the end of season 1 to get him away from Barksdale retribution, and stays out of the story for several episodes. This adds some complications to find him again when Bunk needs to get in touch with Omar so he can testify against Bird.
Real Men Wear Pink: He can walk to the supermarket in blue silk pajamas, completely unarmed, and people will still run away and give him their drugs.
Retirony: Comes out of retirement to avenge Butchie, which gets him killed in a random incident unrelated to Marlo.
Roaring Rampage of Revenge: Omar always goes in these when one of his peoples gets killed.
Rugged Scar: Sports a large one across his face, which only serves to make him more intimidating. Though this is more of a coincidence rather than a deliberate choice as the scar is genuine and one Michael K Williams got years before the series.
Sawed-Off Shotgun: His signature weapon.
Scary Black Man: He's so scary that some drug dealers throw their stash to him as he takes a smoke outside, while unarmed and wearing pajamas.
The Scream: Omar's reaction after viewing the mutilated body of his lover Brandon at a Baltimore morgue. The camera cuts to McNulty's sons (who are waiting in the main lobby for their father) freezing in shock when he screams.
Screw the Money, I Have Rules!: His code matters more to him than money, and when he's going after Marlo, he steals Marlo's money and product, then lights it on fire or throws it away. As he says the first time he does this:
Now you make sure you tell ol' Marlo I burned the money. Cause this ain't about that paper, it's about me hurtin' his people, messin' with his world. Tell that boy he ain't man enough to come down to the street with Omar!
Second Episode Introduction: Introduced in the third episode of the series, going on to become a major character.
Shotguns Are Just Better: His weapon of choice, though he occasionally uses a pistol.
Shrouded in Myth: After his death, the story makes the rounds through the streets getting bigger each time it's told. When another character who knows the truth tries to correct someone, no one believes him. 'The bigger the lie, the more they believe.'
Sinister Whistling: Downplayed. While he's a better person than the vast majority of the criminal characters, Omar Little is still a vicious criminal who exploits this trope, whistling "The Farmer and the Dell" as he robs (usually even worse) people.
Sir Swears-a-Lot: Inverted. On a show where almost everyone drops f-bombs at the slightest provocation, he's the only one who refuses to swear and complains when others do. If anything, this only enhances his "force of nature in a duster" status. And in the event that he does swear, you know that the feces has collided with the air circulator.
Smoking Is Cool: He has a tendency to be filmed at least once every season lurking in the shadows of a back alley smoking a cigarette.
Spanner in the Works: Omar's revenge sprees has messed up MCU's investigations more than once.
Stealing from Thieves: He robs the dealers who steal from the city and redistributes the wealth to the people.
Story Overshadowed by Bigger News: His death is left out of the paper by Gus in favor of a fire.
Suspect Is Hatless: "Black. Big. With a large weapon" Courtesy of Andy Krawczyk, who gets in the middle of his feud with Stringer. As Bunk puts it, "BNBG": Big Negro, Big Gun.
Theme Music Power-Up: Whistling "The Farmer in the Dell".
Third-Person Person: From time to time... "Omar's listening."
Trademark Favorite Food: Honey Nut Cheerios. His attempts and failures to get them is a minor Running Gag.
In a variant, he regularly smokes Newport cigarrettes.
Tragic Hero: Omar could have lived happily ever after if he hadn't tried to avenge Butchie.
Trauma Conga Line: Season 5 is this for him. First, his friend and mentor Butchie is killed. Then, his revenge assault on Marlo ends with him having to jump out of a 5 story window, breaking his leg. After this, he can only do minimal damage to Marlo's operation by killing a few of his guys and robbing a few stash houses. He tells Marlo's people to put word out that he's calling Marlo out, but Marlo will not come out to the street to face him. His last stash house robbery ends with him hollering out insulting Marlo to an empty corner. Then he goes into a store and gets unceremoniously shot in the head by Kenard. To add final insult to injury, he becomes nothing more than a statistic after his death, with only the hood caring who he was at all.
Übermensch: Analyzed as such, due to being and independent but principled personal-code warrior.
Undignified Death: He is one of the biggest badasses in the show and he gets one of the most worthless deaths in the show: blindsided by a Young Gun who's twelve years old at most and blows Omar's brains out from behind. Further salt is rubbed in the wound in that his death is ignored by the Baltimore Sun due to a lack of space and a coroner nearly mixes up his information with someone else. Omar goes from a legend of the streets to just another statistic of the criminal world within less than a day.
Victory Is Boring: Has a moment like this when he walks to a grocery store in nothing but his pajamas. He wasn't even planning on a robbery, and was just trying to get some of his favorite cereal. That doesn't stop everyone from clearing his path just at the sight of him. And one of the dealers drops his stash to him from an upper-story window. He comments to Renaldo that it just isn't the same thing as working for it, holding up dealers at gun point while they had some kind of chance, however small, to fight back and keep some element of uncertainty in the game.
Villainous Breakdown: Omar is the lesser of two evils when compared to Marlo but he counts when he shows signs toward the end of season 5 as his physical condition deteriorates and his unsubtle Roaring Rampage of Revenge becomes more and more disastrous for him. It ends with him capped in the head by Kenard when out at a corner shop.
Villainous BSoD: Bunk's "The Reason You Suck" Speech about how his violence does harm the community despite he's only targeting bad guys makes Omar recapacitate, leading to Butchie's "conscience do cost" speech.
Walking Shirtless Scene: A downplayed version; he wears shirts (and body armor) when he's out and about, but at home he tends to go shirtless (displaying his impressive if scarred physique).
Weapon-Based Characterization: Shotguns and shotgun ammo are fairly easy to procure all things considered, but also quite a bit bigger than most street guns, giving him a size and offense advantage against his targets. They don't reload particularly fast, but he doesn't typically need to fire many shots. Shotguns are also the go-to weapons of farmers seeing off trespassers, tying into his theme song of "The Farmer in the Dell".
Weapon Specialization: The moment shotgun shells are found in a game-related crime scene, the police know Omar was there. He also favors large caliber pistols: he's seen using a .44 Magnum (Desert Eagle or Colt Anaconda), .45 ACP semi-automatics, and .50 Action Express.
Zipping Up the Bodybag: His final fate. We see Omar's body bag being zipped up in the morgue at the end of an episode. Furthermore, in this scene, it's shown that there was a mistake with the ID tags, which the ME has to correct, which further emphasize the point: he's no longer a character or a feared legend of the underworld, just another statistic.