All Girls Want Bad Boys: Deconstructed. She began an affair with McNulty while he was still married. And even after he left his wife, he would only be with her for sexual favors and blatantly told her so at one point. Rhonda eventually wises up, and begins an actual and healthy relationship with the much kinder and more responsible Daniels.
Ambition Is Evil: She always has one eye on the implications for her career and frequently brings them up to others to attempt to justify her point of view. McNulty confronts her about the implications of her ambitions when she points out that pushing too hard against Levy would mean antagonizing the whole profession, a terrible thing for her career.
Jimmy: If only half you motherfuckers at the district attorney's office didn't want to be judges, didn't want to be partners in some downtown law firm... If half of you had the fucking balls to follow through, you know what would happen? A guy like that would be indicted, tried and convicted. And the rest of 'em would back up enough, so we could push a clean case or two through your courthouse. But no, everybody stays friends. Everybody gets paid. And everybody's got a fucking future.
Catchphrase: "Cedric!" note 
Dude Magnet: McNulty, Daniels, and Judge Phelan all certainly can agree.
Hello, Attorney!: An attractive lawyer who attracts about three men in the series.
Hypocrite: Rhonda is crushed by McNulty cheating on her, but she had no problem with having an affair with a him when he was with his wife.
In-Series Nickname: Usually referred to as "Ronnie".
Iron Lady: A firm and unwavering attorney who often takes difficulties in stride or talks down allies and foes alike.
Official Couple:
Averted with her and McNulty; he only wanted to be with her for sexual favors and she got fed up with it.
Played straight with her and Daniels in Season 3 onwards.
Screw the Rules, I'm Beautiful!: She uses Judge Phelan's attraction to her to get favorable rulings out of him in a few cases with weak probable causes.
Daniels: Quite the legal mind.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Ultimately gets fed up with McNulty, and begins a relationship with the responsible, hardworking Daniels who is actually interested in a relationship and doesn't even think of sleeping with other women.
Where da White Women At?: She and Daniels must initially keep their relationship a secret because it becoming known that Daniels was divorcing his wife Marla and dating a white woman instead would harm Marla's political career.
Working with the Ex: She and McNulty are carrying on a discontinuous affair at the start of the show, which causes some awkwardness later in their professional relationship.