Alternate Teaching Method: Roland Pryzbylewski's arc as a new teacher in Season 4 sees him realize what does and doesn't stick with his students when trying to teach math, with him finding success in teaching probability using dice games, to the point that the kids ask him, "Can we practice probabilities now?"
Author Avatar: Series co-creator Ed Burns was also a Baltimore cop who later retired from the force and became a middle school teacher.
Awesomeness by Analysis: Downplayed if compared with Freamon's, but the man has his moments where he's viewed with admiration by his colleagues for being The Smart Guy / Techno Wizard of the (not very literate) group, cracking codes, enhancing images and such.
Be Careful What You Wish For: Prez becomes a teacher because he wasn't fit to be a cop, only to find out the school system's politics is the same as the police department.
Bullying a Dragon: A rare sympathetic example but punching your superior in the face and your father-in-law at that is never gonna end well.
Calling the Old Man Out: With violence, when he snaps after Valchek pushes him around too far.
Character Development: He's initially incompetent as a policeman, but he gets better with some guidance. This also carries into his stint as a teacher, where he starts out naive and overwhelmed, but learns to be a Reasonable Authority Figure for the kids.
Cool Teacher: Season 4 onwards, once he changes jobs. He tries to be an authoritative but still respectful teacher.
Desk Jockey: He becomes this at the beginning of season 1 and proves to be a valuable player in the position, in contrast to his ineptitude as a beat cop. According to Sydnor, Prez was unseemly good at paperwork when Sydnor himself has to pick up after him.
Establishing Character Moment: A hopeless case of Reckless Gun Usage -luckily against a wall- in his very first scene.
Expository Hairstyle Change: In his last appearance in the show, Dukie comes to meet him to get money "to take the GED", we see Prez has become a much more confident authority figure as a teacher, and shows it by sporting a full beard.
A Father to His Men: The teacher version, from season 4 onwards.
Friend or Foe?: He mistakes a fellow cop for a gangster and shoots him to death by mistake in season 3.
Hidden Depths: As a police officer, Prez is utterly hopeless at working in the field, but it turns out he is quite gifted as a data analyst and paper chaser, something Lester discovers as he mentors him.
Idiot Ball: In-universe. Practically anyone working with him thinks he has a death grip. He eventually gets better.
Used rather painfully after his accidental shooting of Officer Waggoner in season 3. All the other police present are talking about how much of a fuck-up Prez is based off of his record prior to joining the MCU, not having seen the way that he's grown in the years since. McNulty's expression as he listens to Landsman lambaste the guy says it all: Prez's mistake is so huge that McNulty can't really refute the talk, but at the same time he knows just how unfair it is that no one outside the unit will ever understand the true quality Prez has demonstrated to his comrades.
Idiot Houdini: He is not malicious despite his poor violent actions; he is just not made for being a field cop and since his father-in-law has pull it doesn't matter.
I Just Shot Marvin in the Face: He does not get along well with guns — first shooting a wall because he forgot to clear the chamber, then killing Waggoner on the assumption that he was a fleeing suspect.
In-Series Nickname: "Prez" among his police colleagues and "Prezbo" to his students, who struggle to pronounce his actual last name.
Karma Houdini: Is never seriously disciplined for any of his numerous mistakes, and the limited repercussions he faces frequently work out well for him.
His only punishment for shooting up his own squad car and pistol whipping and blinding an unarmed kid in one eye for no reason is to lose his gun and be relegated to desk duty... which he soon discovers he has a natural aptitude for and comes to enjoy.
He punches a superior officer in the face and never faces any real consequences. There's never even any indication that his wife (the superior's daughter) was upset about it. Although to be fair, given how much of an unlikeable Jerkass Valchek is perhaps this isn't so surprising.
Even killing another cop only results in him losing his job without any criminal charges being filed. He bounces back by becoming a teacher.
Leeroy Jenkins: One of the reasons he's a poor street cop is his tendency to panic and rush in without a plan in dangerous situations. This flaw ultimately ends his police career when he accidentally kills a plainclothes officer who didn't identify himself.
Manly Facial Hair: In season 5. He's become a pillar of authority at his school and it comes with a sterner change in temperament.
AM/FM Characterization: Plays Johnny Cash during "work-montage" scenes—"I Walk the Line" when the MCU is piecing together the operation at the docks in Season 2, and "Ring of Fire" while fixing up his classroom at the start of Season 4.
Mistaken for Racist: His hair trigger has caused him to hurt black people. Doesn't help that the police force keeps covering for him.
My God, What Have I Done?: After he accidentally shoots and kills Officer Waggoner.
Nepotism: His career in the force exists because he is Valchek's son-in-law. He eventually grows tired of this and decides not to put a defense after his last accident and to pursue a new career.
Nice Guy: Whilst in the first season he Would Hurt a Child, he fully becomes a caring person as a teacher in Season 4. Not to mention there's genuinely no racism or classism to this guy (though Prez believes he may have had some deeply internalized racism to have shot a fellow cop because he was black).
Only Sane Employee: It's painfully jarring that something is awfully wrong with the initial Sobotka detail when Prez is the only one resembling any display or desire of competence.
Valchek: You sent me a detail of humps, Ervin.
Precision F-Strike: His pleased reaction to the pieces coming together in the Sobotka case. "Fucking A"
Reasonable Authority Figure: After becoming a teacher.
Reassignment Backfire: Twice in the series - first when he becomes a Desk Jockey instead of a beat cop, which allows him to bring his decoding skills to the table and aid the Barksdale investigation; then when he's kicked off the police force and becomes a teacher, a profession he turns out to be very well-suited for.
Reckless Gun Usage: He accidentally discharge on a wall because he didn't clear the round in the chamber and accidentally blind a kid by pistol whipping him in the eye. One of the main rules of gun safety being to treat a gun as if it was loaded at all time Prez fails miserably at that.
Second Episode Introduction: Another regular dumped into Daniel's detail in the second episode.
The Smart Guy: Zig-Zagged — He's a bad street cop, but he turns out to be highly adept at cracking the Barksdale gang's pager codes and figuring out how their organization fits together.
Took a Level in Badass: Twice — first as a cop although he later backslides, then as a teacher.
The Unpronounceable: Lampshaded. His students end up calling him "Prezbo" instead.
Would Hurt a Child: In Season 1, he pistol-whips a 14-year-old kid in the eye, leaving him blind in that eye. Later on, when he runs into the kid again, he is unable to look the kid in the eye. Prez gets better and ends up teaching kids of that age.