Affably Evil: He is generally polite and soft-spoken, and treats the Sobotkas quite nicely, almost as old friends. In the end, he persuades The Greek to ask the Sobotkas to keep quiet rather than actually killing them (though at first he succeeds, the plan fails). Spiros is also saddened when they drop Proposition Joe as a business partner, knowing well that Marlo, the new one, would kill Joe.
Bad Guys Do the Dirty Work: Vondas slits Sailor Sam's throat, the man responsible for killing the girls in the can. Doing so allows Major Crimes to solve the murders once they flip Sergei to reveal the truth at the end of the season. Also, as Bunk and Lester discover, the crew of the ship was not going to cooperate either way, so Vondas ended up making 14 unsolvable murders solvable, even if he is never arrested for it.
Bald of Evil: Is balding and is a ruthless criminal involved in multiple major criminal dealings, including being the wholesaler who supplies Prop Joe with high quality heroin, large scale Human Trafficking, and smuggling of stolen goods.
Contrived Coincidence: Despite being tipped off, the main reason Vondas isn't arrested is because Herc and Carver, who were stationed at the diner, were distracted and missed him leaving.
Deadpan Snarker: On several occasions he shows an extremely dry and deadpan wit, such as when The Greek sees how fond Spiros is of Nick Sobotka and comments that Spiros should be a father. Spiros replies with a snarky "But then I'd have a wife".
Devious Daggers: He kills both Sam and Frank using a knife, rather than a gun. It's a more personal and intimate way to kill someone and all his targets are people who betrayed the organization. It reflects willingness to stab someone in the back when they are no longer an ally, with him slitting Sam's throat explicitly from behind.
The Dragon: He's The Greek's Number Two and the two appear to be genuine pals to boot.
Evil Mentor: To Nick Sobotka, to whom he takes a liking, treating him almost as the son he doesn't have.
Fauxreigner: Spiros has several passports from different countries, all in different names. In Baltimore he uses a Greek name. Since he speaks and texts in Greek, this appears to be his actual nationality.
Ziggy: So, uh, you must be The Greek.
Vondas: [long pause] Well, I'm Greek, anyway.
Foil: To Marlo Stanfield - Marlo is eager to show off his power, whilst Spiros cares more about blending in. Marlo declares, "MY NAME IS MY NAME", whilst Spiros says, "but my name is not my name". Guess who ends up arrested and who gets off scot-free.
Good Smoking, Evil Smoking: Evil, clearly; he rarely appears without a cigarette in his hand.
The Heavy: For Season 2, since the Greek does not appear nearly as much as him and uses him as a Mouth of Sauron. Vondas is able to make many decisions on his behalf and always meets people for his boss. Additionally, Paul Ben-Victor is credited as a starring lead in Season 2 and Bill Raymond, despite playing the Big Bad, is credited as a Guest Star.
I Have Many Names: A mundane (and criminal) version as he has many false identities and cover IDs, all of which have apparently legitimate documentation and backstories. As he puts it after showing Nick one of his passports "Many names, many passports".
Karma Houdini: Along with his boss, he escapes punishment entirely.
Mister Big: Downplayed in that he's not freakishly short (Paul Ben-Victor is around 5'7) or actually the boss. Vondas is still shorter than almost every other character he talks to, but he is the main visible authority figure of the organization.
Mouth of Sauron: The Greek does pretty much all of his talking through him, due to his policy of No One Sees the Boss.
Multiple Identity IDs: He displays at least three different passports from various countries over the course of the second season, all apparently legitimate, all with different names. He even casually destroys and burns the one that he showed Nick Sobotka, then immediately takes out another.
Number Two: To the Greek.
Only Friend: He's the only person The Greek is shown to have a genuine bond with.
OOC Is Serious Business: While normally a calm, affable, and smooth-talking guy, Vondas is silent and scowling when looking at Sailor Sam during his interrogation. He slits Sam's throat shortly after.
Pragmatic Villainy: He prefers to avoid violence if he can, not out of moral conviction but because it tends to make a mess and draw attention from the police. When it becomes necessary, he is perfectly willing to cut a throat or two, as Frank Sobotka learns.
Secret Test of Character: He likes gauging reactions of young criminals asking him a favor.
When Nick asks for help with Cheese bullying Ziggy, Vondas asks him if he wants them to kill Cheese. Nick points out that Ziggy would have a target on his back and before long someone from Cheese's crew would come after him for revenge. Also, Nick has enough of a sense of fairness to say that it's not right for Ziggy to get bailed out in such a way because Ziggy did genuinely screw up a business arrangement. Vondas appreciates both the intelligence and fairness of Nick's answer and so assigns Sergei to fix the issue.
When Marlo tries to be their new liaison Vondas first asks him to launder his money then make disparaging comments about Marlo's background and how him and the Greek don't care much about the streets. It was to see how Marlo reacts and how serious he is about taking over.
The Sociopath: Though Vondas is actually quite pleasant if he likes you, he never seems to value anyone else's life and sees people more as things. This is best shown when he tells the Greek that he misses Frank the very next day after slitting Frank's throat and tossing him into the sea. On the other hand, he does seem genuinely fond of Nick and goes out of his way to protect Nick from being just another loose end that gets cleaned up.
Villainous Friendship: He and The Greek seem genuinely close and talk in a friendly manner.