The Atoner: After killing Glekas in a fit of rage, he's immediately overcome with regret and willingly goes to the police to confess.
Attention Whore: His most defining trait. He can't seem to walk into a room without trying to take it over. He pathologically draws attention from the longshoremen, constantly messes up business deals with the Greek, and is always making a fool of himself in the bar. It seems to be a manifestation of his mental dysfunctions.
Boisterous Weakling: Talks quite a lot about taking down Cheese, Maui, and anyone else he thinks has wronged him, but has the physique of a stick insect and gets easily taken down whenever he tries.
Bond One-Liner: "Malaka."
Butt-Monkey: Played for laughs at first, later not so much.
A typical example is when his coworkers goad him into attacking the much larger and stronger Maui. Maui doesn't even bother to beat Ziggy up aside from landing a single punch, but just humiliates Ziggy by lifting him onto the top of a stack of containers and leaving him there.
The fact that he's not taken seriously contributes to him commiting a murder.
I got tired of being the punchline to every joke.
Chaotic Stupid: Ziggy makes a mess out of absolutely everything he says and does; Lighting hundred dollar bills on fire in a pub full of poor working men, buying a pet duck and giving it whisky (causing it to die), repeatedly picking fights with bigger and tougher people, whipping out his member in a crowded bar—if it's stupid, and he thinks there's a laugh in it, he'll do it. He eventually realizes how foolish he's been acting and becomes much more somber and reserved, but it's come too late to avert tragedy.
Diagnosed by the Audience: He seems to have autism of some sort, as he struggles with social cues, engages in pathological behaviors, and has a bad self-preservation instinct to say the least. Combined with the other things in his life, he's not functioning great.
The Dog Bites Back: Snaps and kills Glekas after being humiliated and ripped off one too many times.
Don't You Dare Pity Me!: He resents his cousin helping him and wants to prove he can stand on his own two feet.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: A consequence of being as spoiled as he is at home and at work is that he's perpetually disrespected by everyone and resents how little status he has.
Establishing Character Moment: He's first introduced totally failing at finding something for a client, before getting summarily fired by Frank, only for another longshoreman to reveal that was all for show, since he's Frank's son and will be employed again once the client leaves. The next thing he's shown doing is walking into a stevedore bar, haranguing all of them, and then flashing his penis for a laugh. He's idiotic, has a dad who won't fire him for doing a bad job and knows it, and a perpetual immature attention-seeker.
A few episodes later he's also seen ranting about how much he hates college students, showing that despite his more intellectual side and ambition, he's not wise enough to pursue formal education as an alternative.
Fatal Flaw: His desperate desire for respect, approval, and to prove himself.
Felon's Failson: In contrast to his cunning and ambitious father and his pragmatic, realistic cousin, Ziggy is seriously out of his depth entering the criminal world. He attempts to become a supplier for corner drug dealers, but is scammed out of the money because no one is intimidated by him, and when he steals from the docks, he overdoes it by taking a whole container of digital cameras, and then showing up the next day to work a $3,000 leather jacket, and after stealing a bunch of luxury cars for Glekas to ship overseas, shows up to pick up the money in a car stolen from the same lot, leading to a fight which ends in Ziggy shooting Glekas and his shop assistant. The last time we see him in jail, he's clearly out of his depth and already beaten up by other inmates.
Fearless Fool: Makes decisions that any moron should see are really bad ideas because of a combination of shortsightedness, being too brave for his own good, and Small Name, Big Ego.
A Fool and His New Money Are Soon Parted: Any money he makes is either spent on frivolities that he loses almost immediately or is thrown away in a fit of rage over if he feels disrespected in the process of earning it. After murdering Glekas, he leaves the money he earned from the car heist to the innocent store clerk whom he also shot.
Fish Out of Water: Is tiny compared to his peers amongst the longshoremen, which is implied to be another thing driving his behavior, as even though stevedoring doesn't involve a lot of lifting these days, it still prides itself on strength.
Gag Penis: Takes his out a few times, and the audience gets to see.
Hidden Depths: Ziggy does have some eye for research and current technology that eludes his coworkers, such as his knowledge about digital cameras (which were cutting edge at the time).
Inferiority Superiority Complex: In spades.
Kick the Dog: While the other longshoremen are shown to be a bit casual about race relations, when he gets mugged by a black gang he owes money to and has to explain what happened to Nick after he spends the whole conversation calling them the n-word in a way that's clearly not meant to be playful or ironic.
The Load: Is one for the longshoremen in general, and the Sobotkas specifically. It's implied he's hung around there in part because he has trouble getting a job anywhere else.
Male Frontal Nudity: On a couple of occasions.
My God, What Have I Done?: Has this reaction after killing Glekas and shooting the kid working in the shop.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Always called by his nickname "Ziggy" rather than his given name. The Greeks exclusively refer to him as "Malaka" (a word rich enough in meaning to have its own page on The Other Wiki).
Phrase Catcher: Nearly every Greek character calls him a "malaka" to his face.
The Precious, Precious Car: His Camaro, Princess, which first gets stolen, then torched.
The Alleged Car the Camaro has also clearly been spackled for damages and Cheese doesn't seem to think it's worth all that much.
Puppy-Dog Eyes: His default expression, which serves to elicit sympathy from the audience.
Put on a Prison Bus: While most major characters who get sent to prison come back in some fashion, Ziggy just disappears from the story after getting locked up.
Sibling Yin-Yang: With his cousin Nick. Nick is a responsible, stable, and intelligent guy who'd prefer to be doing legal work but can't get enough of it, while Ziggy is an impulsive Manchild who thinks selling drugs will make him look hard.
Sad Clown: He's always entertaining, but it in large part seems to be an attempt to just earn respect of any kind considering how much people disrespect him.
Smart Ball: With the car heist, Ziggy finally comes up with a scheme that works flawlessly. However, the guy he's selling the cars to, Double G, decides to only give him half the money they agreed upon for no discernible reason besides not liking him. This makes Ziggy snap and shoot Double G to death.
Spoiled Brat: While not explicitly stated, it's clear that his dad being the boss at his workplace and thus not being willing to fire him or scold him for his antics has played a large part in becoming the menace he is presently.
Suspicious Spending: Buys a 2,000 dollar leather Italian jacket early on after selling stolen cameras to the Greeks, which gets him reprimanded by Nick and shows how pathological his attention-seeking is. He's smart enough to know it's a bad idea, but wants the clout too much to not do it.
Tragic Villain: While Ziggy is ultimately a huge pain in the ass who causes more problems than he solves for everyone in his orbit, it's also clear that he's very unsuited for the longshoreman life and would be much better off working in business, as he's very intuitive and motivated when it comes to spotting and selling merchandise, amongst other talents. That he's stuck in a dead-end profession that won't be really viable in even five years and speaks of attending college with derision is just as much a result of his father's neglect and shortsightedness as his own problems.
Uncertain Doom: Ultimately, it's never shown if Ziggy was tough enough to handle even the "nicer" prison Nick's co-operation with the police landed him in. On the one hand, being away from the calcified longshoremen environment he'd been in his whole life might do wonders for his development, as he'll finally be able to be "his own man" without his dad or his name hanging over him. On the other hand, he's still a pretty dumb guy in a dangerous situation who might piss the wrong person off and have a bad experience. The outcome is ultimately left up to the viewer.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: His actions end up bringing down his family and the whole stevedores union with it.
Walking Disaster Area: Involving Ziggy in your activities, criminal or otherwise, is a terrific way to torpedo such ventures.
When You Coming Home, Dad?: In addition to everything else, the other major thing driving his actions seems to be an awareness that his dad's loyalty is first and foremost overwhelmingly to the union, and so he's taken to acting out in an escalating attempt to get his attention. By season's end, it's worked, though not in the way he might have hoped.