The Ace: Gilfoyle is probably the smartest member of the main cast, he's the most consistently impressive at his job and he generally succeeds at everything he attempts to do well. Most attempts to outdo him don't end well for his rivals.
Always Someone Better: Generally outdoes Dinesh at everything with ease and loves rubbing it in his face. Even Java, which is Dinesh’s self-proclaimed area of expertise.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: For all of his quirks, he's arguably the most skilled all-around member of the Pied Piper crew. He's proficient with both coding and installing hardware, and can be far more social than Richard or Dinesh when needed. Tellingly, when he considers finding a different job in Season 3, he is heavily recruited.
Catchphrase: He's fond of telling people to "chortle my balls."
Creepy Monotone: Always speaks in a flat voice to reflect his stoic personality. It's Played for Laughs.
Deadpan Snarker: Almost every line out of his mouth is a cutting remark.
Divergent Character Evolution: The situation with him and Dinesh is a little like this. Originally they were defined primarily by their rivalry with each other, but as the series has gone on they've developed more unique character traits distinct from each other. They're still in almost every scene together, though.
Embarrassing Nickname: Ocasionally calls Richard "Dick". Although it is a common short for "Richard", wouldn't be surprising if he's actually calling him a dick considering its Gilfoyle we're talking about.
Everyone Has Standards: Despite his openly nihilistic personality, there are a few times he shows limitations:
He doesn't appreciate people lying to him.
Along with Dinesh, he gets disgusted when Richard acts like a jerkass just to attain his goals.
He even considered Richard's accidental outing of Deedee (a gay CEO) as a Christian (considered a sin in the tech world) to be in poor taste.
In the series finale, Gilfoyle is the first to insist on destroying the Pied Piper Network, having discovered its security flaws.
Friendship Denial: Quite literally, in that Gilfoyle likes John enough to play 42 games of chess with him, but his antisocial nature requires that they barely acknowledge it, only taking turns when the other isn't looking at the board. After Gilfoyle decides to pause the games, he immediately denies a friend request from John but notably hovers over the Accept button for a few seconds first.
Freudian Excuse: While Gilfoyle's childhood is hardly ever touched upon, he has hinted at animosity towards his mother, referring to her as a "backstabbing bitch".
Gadgeteer Genius: Pied Piper's hardware specialist. When Gavin Belson makes Pied Piper radioactive to every hosting provider they approach, Gilfoyle builds the company servers in the garage.
Hollywood Satanism: Mostly averted. Gilfoyle is a self-described "LaVeyan Satanist with some theistic tendencies." And while he attends a "baptism" ceremony, no one there is portrayed as explicitly evil. In fact, the priest especially is a very nice man. On the other hand, while Gilfoyle seems to treat some of his co-workers as true friends (he appears to genuinely like and respect Richard, for example), he espouses an extremely nihilistic and cynical worldview, asserting that people are all just "animals in a pit" and saying he trusts nobody.
Immune to Slapstick: In a show whose cast is primarily characters meant to be laughed at, Gilfoyle stands out as the one character that's never made the butt of the joke and comes across as meant to be laughed with, even with all the ridiculous things he says and does.
Insufferable Genius: He's a highly-skilled coder who's almost entirely self-taught, and often looks down on others because of it. Lampshaded by his HR file.
Jerkass Has a Point: Gilfoyle may be a cynical dick, but 9 times out of 10 he makes a good point. For instance, when Jian Yang buys a refrigerator, Gilfoyle correctly critiques that it's using technology to solve non existent problems (such as the feature to look at your food from a screen, something that has little to no practical purpose).
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He's outwardly abrasive and cynical, but is loyal to the crew and has his moments of true kindness.
Karma Houdini: Is the only one able to completely get away with being a Jerkass and nothing bad ever happens to him. This is Played for Laughs as he often enjoys other people's torments, Dinesh being his primary entertainment. The closest this gets to being averted is during Season 5 where he and the rest are kicked out of the Incubator by Jian Yang but he ultimately gets the last laugh as Jian Yang allows them back into the Incubator during the season finale thanks to him stupidly gambling all of his money away.
Karmic Jackpot: In the finale it's Gilfoyle who discovers how potentially dangerous their product could become, and is the first one to advocate for ruining the code before it threatens world security. Whether Gilfoyle did this for moral reasons or pragmatic, in the end he and Dinesh come out on top after the falling out of Pied Piper, starting their own cybersecurity company and becoming rich in the process.
Kavorka Man: Gilfoyle obviously doesn't put much effort into his appearance, but he has a gorgeous girlfriend who stuns the other Incubator residents. On a non-sexual level, he's demonstrated he also has the ability to quickly make friends with strangers if he wants to - he just usually doesn't try, probably because of his cynical views on people.
Last-Name Basis: His first name is Bertram, but nobody ever calls him that.
Living Lie Detector: He shows this ability in one third season episode, and at least on the nervous and awkward Jared it seems to work. Setting up a later moment in the same episode when he pretends to believe Jared for the good of the company, but clearly knows he's lying.
Odd Friendship: With Monica in later seasons.
Only One Name: Practically everyone calls him Gilfoyle.
OOC Is Serious Business: in the Series Finale, when Dinesh informs the Pied Piper that their plan to sabotage their own launch is compromised, he insists they trust him to upload the correct code into their network, despite telling them earlier not to trust him. When Richard fails to decide if he can trust Dinesh or not, Gilfoyle takes the initiative and grants Dinesh access back into the network. This shows that despite what he'll say publicly, Gilfoyle does have some respect for Dinesh.
The Illegal: Gilfoyle is Canadian and was briefly in the US illegally. This pisses Dinesh off because he thought the guys immediately assumed it would be him. Once Gilfoyle quickly sorts things out, Dinesh is pissed off even further because of the implied racism and how long it took him and his family to legally earn their citizenship.
Ship Tease: With Monica, as they spend a lot of time together in Seasons 4 and 5. He even tells that her he likes her, albeit in a platonic way.
Smart People Play Chess: Played with. Gilfoyle owns a limited edition Cthulu-themed board and plays chess with John, though John has won over 40 games while Gilfoyle hasn't won any.
The Stoic: Very rarely emotes. Even when he does, he still talks in the same monotone voice.
The Stoner: Keeps mushrooms in an ice cream carton in the fridge, and is seen smoking pot by the pool in at least one episode (leading to an argument with Richard about whether he was getting high at work or at home, since the Incubator house is also Pied Piper's offices).
Those Two Guys: With Dinesh. They're in almost every scene together and when they're not busy sassing each other, will brutally sass other characters in a dual effort. They ultimately open their own cybersecurity company together in the Distant Finale.
Troll: Especially if the target is Dinesh. Most notably in Season 4 when he agrees with Richard's decision to promote Dinesh to CEO just so he can see Dinesh fail. Gilfoyle gets his wish later on when it's revealed that Dinesh didn't bother adding Terms of Service to PiperChat, thus making Dinesh's chat app in violation of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act and making Dinesh potentially liable of $21 billion in fines. Gilfoyle even pops a bottle of champagne in celebration of Dinesh's fuck-up.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Dinesh and Gilfoyle spend most of the first season as rivals trying to out-do each other, still give no sign of liking each other in the least, and argue and mock each other constantly, yet they never seem to be separated. When Jared points out that they are basically each other's best friend, they both immediately tell him to shut up.
Xanatos Gambit: He sees his decision to back Dinesh as PiperChat CEO as this. While he’s counting on Dinesh failing, he admits that should Dinesh succeed as CEO, they will all become rich, so he benefits either way