Animal Metaphor: Tries to make these frequently to Hooli execs, with varying degrees of success.
Bad Boss: His underlings are terrified of him for good cause. In one Season 5 episode, he makes an offhand remark that "The bear is sticky with honey" before leaving, sending his panicked employees into long meetings to try to figure out what he meant rather than simply ask him.
Big Bad: He's the Pied Piper team's most frequent enemy. Whether he's actually the team's most powerful enemy at any given time tends to vary, though, as, particularly later on, he has to constantly scramble to maintain his position as the tech industry's top dog.
But for Me, It Was Tuesday: Is honestly surprised when his engineers quit and reveal they were part of a team he fired and then re-hired with absolutely no idea they were the same guys.
Can't Take Criticism: To a ridiculous degree. When Nucleus fails, he reassigns the team to reprogram the Hooli search engine to block negative news stories about it. When that scandal is exposed and Hooli is beset by bad press and protesters, he asks his legal team for permission to have his critics killed!
Complexity Addiction:
When his attempt to bug the gang is hit by a tracker that overloads his phone and laptop, Gavin demands to shut down power to the building despite his techs telling him it's contained on his personal devices.
He's convinced Jack had to have his flight delayed twenty minutes simply as part of an overall plot to throw off Gavin's plans and create a huge power struggle. That Jack just wanted a stopover to see his kids doesn't occur to Gavin.
Dick Dastardly Stops to Cheat: One major character trait is that he'll use every underhanded tactic he can to his advantage. Exemplified when he organizes a charity triathlon and does things like jump the gun, order his bodyguards to knock out competitors, and bring in a ringer when he gets too tired.
Enemy Mine: A brief one with Richard in Season 4 after he's ousted as CEO of Hooli by Jack Barker.
Evil Is Petty:
Moves Jack Barker to a tiny sub-basement office after Jack has their flight from Shanghai diverted to Jackson Hole, which causes a twenty-minute delay. Even worse, Gavin instructs one of his stooges to take the company jet on that route six times just to prove Jack wrong.
In Season 5, he buys out all of the 63 coders Pied Piper had approached to hire just to spite them.
Fatal Flaw: Gavin's is his egotism and need to be in control of everything. Richard eventually recognizes this flaw and exploits it in the Season 5 finale by offering Gavin a handwritten contract giving him full control of Pied Pier just to keep Gavin from deleting Piper Net. Gavin falls for it, to only realize too late that the contract is a ruse to stall him while Piper Net regains control of its network.
Hoist by His Own Petard: Gavin's attempts at taking down Pied Piper all blow up in his face in increasingly spectacular disasters.
By trying to roll out Nucleus first, he forces the team to use a hastily put together algorithm that doesn't work and he's left scrambling to find a scapegoat while the Hooli board threatens to replace him.
His strategy of promoting Big Head to a position of influence as a legal tactic backfires because Big Head doesn't have the knowledge or the inspiration to come up with a viable product that could be rolled out to cover up the failure of Nucleus.
He included a non-compete clause in Hooli employment agreements and used it to support his argument that Richard and Jared knowingly broke a contract agreement. But because non-compete clauses are illegal in California, the judge in the binding arbitration declares that this null and voids thousands of employees' contracts, including Richard's. Because this means that Richard wasn't working for Hooli with a valid contract, the company has no legal right to claim ownership of any intellectual property that may have been created on Hooli property. The Hooli board, needless to say, is not pleased.
After some former Hooli employees crack Richard's algorithm and take it to another company, Gavin buys the company to get his own platform on the market while Pied Piper is stuck on another project thanks to their tyrannical boss Jack Barker. But his buying the company also serves to put a concrete price point on a platform based on the algorithm, the lack of which was Barker's entire leverage against doing it.
He illegally orders Hooli's software to eliminate results that speak badly of the company, which Richard gets wind of just in time to feed it to a reporter in place of an article that would have wrecked his own career.
He illegally monitors his employees' personal e-mails and uses the information gained from this surveillance to get a look at Pied Piper's beta. When Richard finds out about this, he has Gilfoyle send a zipbomb that floods Gavin's personal computer and phone with the smiling poop emoji, effectively bricking both devices. Gavin's over-the-top response and subsequent angry outburst towards the EndFrame team causes several to simply walk out.
The Hooli board finally has enough of Gavin and votes to relieve him of his duties and "transition" him into a less oversight of the company. He immediately realizes that he's being exiled to the roof (his personal preference when punishing employees), where all of Hooli's "unassigned" employees congregate.
His habit of using animals as props in his presentations bites him in the ass when he uses an elephant that subsequently dies from stress. After he subsequently fires the employee who protests his decision to illegally dump the elephant, she goes to an online tech blog and tells them the story.
When the reporter talks of it, Gavin decides to buy the blog ...which just so happens to be owned by Erlich, meaning Gavin just paid Pied Piper $2 million.
He acquires Piper Chat from Dinesh because Gavin wanted access to chat logs in order to spy on Jack Barker. In his haste, Gavin doesn't realize that he also inherited the under-age users and pedophiles that made Dinesh want to part with Piper Chat in the first place.
His vindictiveness in throwing Jack Barker to sub-basement D comes back to haunt him after that act pushed Barker into becoming The Starscream.
He tries to get the Seppen smart refrigerator company to sue Pied Piper after he learns Gilfoyle was responsible for the hacking. This leads to Gilfoyle finding out Seppen records their customers' dialogue and gives Jared leverage for Seppen to not only drop the lawsuit but to partner with Pied Piper instead of Hooli.
He rejects a buyout offer from Amazon because they plan to rebrand the company which causes them to start heavily downsizing. This causes him to consider moving Denpok and Hoover overseas. This upsets the normally blindly loyal Hoover into undermining the sale by informing the feds of Hooli having assets that would prevent them from moving parts of the company overseas due to security issues.
When Richard offers to take such assets off his hands as he needs it to prevent a takeover from a foreign entity, he rejects it because he doesn't want to do anything that benefits Richard even if it benefits him as well. Because of the earlier downsizing and because earlier Gavin had bought out Gwart from Jared, he inadvertently reveals Hooli stock is worth a lot less than it used to, making it feasible for Pied Piper to buy them out
Because Gavin can object to the sale, Pied Piper decides to do the sale while Gavin is busy running a vanity charity race that he cheats at.
It's All About Me: His desire to beat the Pied Piper team has nothing to do with making money, or 'making the world a better place' like his advertising claims. Rather, it's simply because he can't stomach someone else getting credit for a revolutionary tech product.
Gavin : I don't know about you people, but I don't want to live in a world where someone else makes the world a better place better than we do.
Ivy League for Everyone: Went to Harvard.
Jerkass: Gavin is an egotistical and insensitive bully with no redeeming qualities. He is a bad boss who manipulates people and fires them for his own mistakes. Even his attempts at philanthropy are clear PR stunts.
Jerkass Has a Point: He flatly calls out Richard for being naive, telling him that if Richard was in Gavin's place he would be trying his best to crush the "little guy" and wouldn't be helping people out.And that everything Richard hates about Silicon Valley and Big Tech is exactly what Richard would be promoting ... which shocks Richard into Stunned Silence as he's not exactly wrong about any of it, as Richard proves that he can be just as self serving,entitled, petty and ruthless as Gavin.
Karma Houdini: By the end of the series, despite having been exiled from Hooli and the tech industry, Gavin still manages to bounce back as a successful trashy romance author and despite his "tethics" manifesto having been exposed as copying different company slogans or brochures, he still managed to get the Technology Ethics department at Stanford named after him.
Kick the Dog: Literally. Jared once saw him throw a sloth down a flight of stairs... possibly on purpose.
Manipulative Bastard: Constantly pulls the emotional heartstrings of both the public and his own employees in order to maintain his self-image and screw over Pied Piper in any way he can.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: He looks like, acts like, and while in a very different field, has similar publicity practices to Gavin Newsom, the former mayor of San Francisco and present Governor of California.
Percussive Therapy: Gavin will smash and throw around an inanimate object when things don't go his way.
Properly Paranoid: In regards to Barker having designs on betraying him, even as his assistants play along, believing these fears unfounded.
Rich in Dollars, Poor in Sense: His wealth and success often blinds him to how much of an idiot he can come off as. At a conference, he shocks the crowd but openly stating that millionaires are persecuted even worse than the Jews in Nazi Germany.
The Sociopath: In one scene, a handwriting expert analyzes Gavin's signature and finds that it suggests "troubling traits" indicative of sociopathy: lack of empathy, a need to dominate, willingness to hurt others to achieve one's goals, inability to accept bad news, etc. It's never outright stated that Gavin is a sociopath, but all of these traits fit him to a T.
Stupid Evil: In season 6, he and Richard both find themselves in dire straits: Richard is about to get his company bought out by an evil Chilean mining baron, and Gavin is about to be ousted from what remains of Hooli after the Amazon merger. When they drink together to their misfortunes, they discover that Richard could buy an app that was a millstone to Gavin and solve both their problems in one fell swoop. Gavin blocks it, since he can't allow himself to aid Richard, no matter how much it would also benefit him.
Villainous Breakdown: When things outright fail, Gavin responds by screaming, throwing tantrums, and even taking his rage out on inanimate objects.
Yes-Man. He's surrounded by them, largely because they're too scared of his outbursts to be anything else. At one point, he tries to stream a live UFC fight in HD using Nucleus. It's a disaster since the Nucleus team is afraid to tell him how far behind they are on getting it to work fine to the point of lying to him.