Abusive Parents: Possibly. He doesn't know who his birth father is, or when he was born exactly. Various comments about his childhood, such as pretending Harriet Tubman was his imaginary friend and the two of them were building an underground railroad to freedom, suggest his childhood was not a pleasant one. It's later revealed that his birth parents not only were well-off and happily married, but actually gave him up due to first-world inconveniences (like travel seating with a third child)... then they decide they really did want a third baby, and instead of trying to get their child back, just decide to have another, giving him the exact same name as the one they gave up.
Adopted to the House: Becomes Richard's roommate after squatters take over his apartment.
Ambiguously Bi: Although he's probably had sex with more women than anyone else in the hacker hostel, he has a strange relationship with Richard that borders on homoerotic.
"And then his eyes went dead, like when I tell him I love him."
"I let my desire to be around Richard, and to be needed by him, turn me into some kind of a craven yes-man, and it clouded my judgment, and I led him down a horrible path."
"HE'S MY PARTNER!"
Apologizes a Lot: Jared is constantly apologizing and self-deprecating due to his vulnerability and insecure nature. He appears to be able to put up with virtually any level of abuse.
Beware the Nice Ones: Jared might be the nicest member of Pied Piper team, but even he can lose it sometimes, like when he calls Gavin's blood boy a dick three times for disagreeing with Richard's idea for him and Gavin's collaboration, when he angrily confronts Richard for messing up his team's big plan to hack their app into every phone of Hooli Con visitors (that Jared has been against from the first place and reluctantly agrees because it's "for the greater good") by hacking his ex-girlfriend's new boyfriend's screensaver, on account of his jealousy, and when he hits Melcher harshly with his shoe to defend Richard who had sex with Melcher's fiancée.
Bilingual Bonus: Jared speaks unsubtitled German in his sleep. Various internet commenters have differing interpretations as to what he's saying (his accent is apparently atrocious), but all agree that the gist is disturbing and suggests that mild-mannered Jared has a well-hidden dark side.
Break the Cutie: He reaches a tipping point when Richard ruins their plan to unethically download Pied Piper into the phones of unsuspecting Hooli Con visitors; he tears up as he angrily confronts him and in the following scene his eyes are noticeably red from crying.
Butt-Monkey: The whole company has had more than its share of misfortune, but Jared has probably suffered more individual mishaps and abuse than anyone else - the time he was accidentally "kidnapped" and sent to a floating island by Peter Gregory's self-driving car is probably the biggest example.
The Casanova: Yes, seriously. "Bachmanity Insanity" reveals he's actually very skilled at picking up women and having sex with them (doing it twice during the episode). He just chose to take a break from dating this whole time so he could focus his energy on Pied Piper. In the next episode "Build a Better Beta" when everyone is trying to decide which friends to send Beta invites to, he's heard muttering the names of multiple women.
The Comically Serious: He's an intelligent, diligent and mild-mannered person and he's also a socially awkward weirdo.
Crazy-Prepared: Jared has "booby-trapped the house with corporate resources."
Creepy Good: While he's by far the outright nicest member of Pied Piper and ultimately means well, he can say and do some pretty creepy things at times, such as his inopportune mentioning of his Dark and Troubled Past or his habit of shouting German in his sleep.
Dark and Troubled Past: From what little we hear of it, he didn't seem to have had a very pleasant childhood.
Embarrassing Nickname: He mentions that his aunt used to call him "glasshole" because of his fragile body. In season 2 he's given the nickname "OJ" (short for Other Jared) when the company considers hiring another Jared.
Expansion Pack Past: The only information we get about his past are details he randomly mentions in passing. These become increasingly mysterious, convoluted and creepy with each passing episode.
"What's gone is not necessarily lost. I found my retainer in my high school dumpster. I found my biological father in a militia in the Ozarks. This should be no problem."
"As a product of forced adoption, I can assure you there are consequences."
Richard: You're always telling me how you spent your entire childhood pretending that everything going on around you was okay.
Jared: Ah, Uncle Jerry's game...
Expy: He's essentially a much kinder version of Zach Woods' other character Gabe Lewis from The Office (US).
Extreme Doormat: Has even less of a backbone than Richard, if that's possible.
The Friend Nobody Likes: None of the Pied Piper team is very inclined to showing much affection or respect for their colleagues, but Jared is treated with open contempt by nearly everybody during the first few seasons in spite of his real contributions to the company. He's more accepted by the company as time goes on, but he remains inadvertently creepy.
Geek Physiques: He's got the tall, skinny variety, standing at 6'4 and with a skinny build that gets him a lot of shit even from other unathletic nerds.
The Generic Guy: Subverted heavily. The show makes you think he’ll be this when he’s first introduced, due to his bland voice and goody-two-shoes nature being seemingly less interesting than the over-the-top personalities of the Hacker Hostel, but is eventually revealed to be completely and utterly strange.
Green-Eyed Monster: He gets extremely jealous of Richard's new assistant, Holden, apparently wanting to keep Richard dependent on him. This culminates with Holden's mysterious disappearance shortly after Jared returns to Pied Piper.
Hidden Depths: Jared comes across like a milquetoast Extreme Doormat, but a Running Gag has him constantly implying a Dark and Troubled Past as well as other eccentricities. He's also revealed to be a very successful ladies' man.
Innocent Blue Eyes: He's got large blue eyes and is by far the sweetest member of Pied Piper. However, it's subverted at times when you realize he's had a much more troubled past than he lets on and that he's not above dubious means to help the company succeed.
Kavorka Man: Season 3 reveals that he has an inexplicable, preternatural talent for picking up women, to the point he is able to get them to spend the night with him while still living in Erlich's garage. A fact that shocks the other Pied Piper members given his gangly stature and pretty plain looks. He explains that he had voluntarily stopped dating for a while to focus on his work at Pied Piper.
Russ Hanneman (upon meeting Jared for the first time): Whoa. I'm just going to say it: this guy fucks, am I right? 'Cause I'm looking at the rest of you guys and this is the guy in the house doing all the fucking, am I right? You know I'm right. This guy fucks!
Large Ham: While he does try to be a peaceful, sensitive and polite gentleman but he can also an emotionally intense and neurotic Cloudcuckoolander.
Mistaken for Gay: His comments on and around Richard border on this.
Mistaken for Pedophile: When pivoting Pied Piper to a family with a toddler, he comes up with a rather strange lie. The parents call the cops, and Hilarity Ensues.
"How much would it be worth to you if I told you I had a GPS app called "Pied Piper", tracking the location of your child? I can follow your child anywhere and there is nothing you can do to stop me. Most missing children are never found. Interested, very interested, or very interested?"
It gets worse when the cops find out he has Adderall: "An underage child gave it to me after I lured him into my house."
Multiple-Choice Past: His background is colorful to say the least, with him making offhand remarks about dozens of traumatizing experiences with foster families across the series. Zach Woods himself has admitted that he makes no attempt at any consistency when improvising these anecdotes.
Never Had Toys: He tells Richard and his girlfriend Winnie that she shares a name with his childhood stuffed animal, except it wasn't really one, but rather a ziploc bag stuffed with newspaper with a smiley face drawn on it.
Nice Guy: Easily the nicest and most openly caring member of Pied Piper by a wide margin.
The Not-Love Interest: Becomes more pronounced after Erlich leaves the cast, where his relationship with Richard, which has distinctly homoerotic undertones but never grows beyond being a good friendship, becomes the closest thing the series has to an emotional center.
Odd Friendship: With Monica.
OOC Is Serious Business: His Undying Loyalty to Richard begins to waver after Richard decides to hijack Hoolicon to upload their code onto users' phones and Richard's subsequent unethical decisions lead to him deciding to quit Pied Piper.
Only Known by Their Nickname: His real name is Donald. Gavin Belson called him Jared once by mistake and Donald/Jared was too scared to correct him.
Parental Neglect: He eventually finds his real birth parents in season 6. When he meets them, they claim that they just weren't ready for him in their lives, but as they talk he discovers that they are a very wealthy couple who actually had four children (he was the third, and they kept the other three). Specifically, he was given up for adoption to make travel arrangements easier, since having a third child would mean the whole family couldn't fit in a single row of first-class (although they soon changed their minds after giving Jared up).
The Pollyanna: He may be intense sometimes but he's still a positive and supportive person under a lot of stress or hardship.
Talking in Your Sleep: Jared talks in his sleep... in German. Oddly, he denies knowing any German. (His poor accent and grammar mean his mutterings can't be perfectly translated, but the general gist of it seems to be about cutting throats and other violent acts... possibly a sign of repressed rage at the insults he constantly endures.)
Team Mom: A nurturing, sensitive and supportive presence to the Pied Piper team, especially Richard. Like many moms, he does Kegel exercises and finds romcom characters played by Julia Roberts highly relatable. It's deconstructed a bit in that he kinda needs someone to take care of out of a codependent desire to feel needed.
The Teetotaler: Jared's been shown to dislike alcoholic beverages throughout the show. He'll accept a drink to toast or to just fit in, but usually just holds it if he doesn't immediately set it down afterwards.
The Thing That Would Not Leave: In the third season, it's revealed that he's only living in Erlich's garage because he's been renting out his condo on Airbnb to cover his mortgage while Pied Piper couldn't afford to pay him. After he starts drawing a decent salary again when Pied Piper is funded, he tries to move back into his condo and discovers that his Airbnb renter doesn't want to leave, and California's landlord-tenant laws mean it could take a year or more to get the guy thrown out. After his squatter leaves, Jared continues living in the garage out of solidarity.
Throw the Dog a Bone: Season 3 is pretty good for Jared:
He's revealed to be a lady's man and gets a number of dates. He states humbly that he's just been voluntarily "taking a break" from romance for a while.
Richard nominates him to replace Erlich on Pied Piper's board, which causes him to emotionally break down.
He is later promoted to Pied Piper's Chief Operating Officer.
Undying Loyalty: To Richard. Jared makes it clear that he'll follow Richard wherever he goes. However, the loyalty gets seriously tested and strained in Season 6 due to conflicts in their individual visions.
Yandere: In a way, Jared’s devotion to Richard. In season 4, when Jared finds out Richard has been considering hiring Jared’s former Hooli co-worker to work with him and Gavin, he tells Richard he’d do anything to get his back- including killing anyone who gets in his way with knives, guns, his hands, or a talk into suicide. When Richard asks if he would really stab someone, Jared laughs it off.