Berserk Button: Has no tolerance for coders who use spaces instead of tabs despite there really being no difference. He ends up dating a girl that he quickly finds out uses spaces. He tries to be cool about it because he likes her but really can't let it go and goes off on her.
Big Good: At the end of the day, Richard is this. He will always take the ethical road no matter what when it comes to matters related to technology, not out of any belief that it is expected of him or that it will make him look good, but because Richard genuinely believes in being ethical and in doing things that benefit people without all the corporate bullshit that infested his life even though it always seems to bite him in the ass.
Beware the Nice Ones: After taking a level in badass over the course of the series, he proves he can be quite the petty, cunning and egotistical manchild when he needs to be.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Meek, neurotic and passive as he might be, Richard is also surprisingly selfish, petty and vindictive to other people. While this is apparent from the beginning, it becomes more pronounced as he becomes more overconfident.
Butt-Monkey: His social awkwardness, anxiety and confidence are constant struggles for Richard but at the same time, he can be an impulsive, childish and Ditzy Genius so he does bring some risky situations upon himself.
Crippling Overspecialization: While Richard is a true wunderkind when it comes to programming, his poor people skills, impulsivity, and lack of business training make him a poor CEO.
The Ditherer: He's very indecisive due to his constant neuroses and lack of confidence.
Ditzy Genius: Richard is an extremely talented programmer who has the ability to redesign an entire platform literally overnight, but he also lacks basic common sense and has very poor decision-making skills. Best shown whenever he has to make decisions that could make or break the company, like accepting a investment from a extremely unethical source
Didn't Think This Through: While Richard is a amazing engineer and coder, the first time he tries to make a platform he has to have Monica spell out to him that it's completely unusable to the vast majority of users as his Complexity Addiction made it so it's only usable to other people who know coding—and he only asked his friends for design input, who are also talented engineers. There's no User Interface at all and Pied Piper is completely unusable for the market.
Earlier, he is so focused on getting a platform out and working on the platform to beat Hooli that he completely disregards the Boring, but Practical idea to design a new gaming console, and goes over Jack Barker's head to get him fired.. As Jared explains this completely dashed their hopes of having money for the platform— as the deal Pied Piper took relied on having a product to market for the full release of funds and they are hemorrhaging money fast—and the sales team that jack hired did have a point that it would be far easier to gain funding for the platform Richard wanted with proof of success.
Extreme Doormat: Richard is socially awkward and extremely passive and uncomfortable when dealing with other people, not to mention so naive that it almost never occurs to him that someone may be trying to screw him or Pied Piper over. He usually needs Erlich's help when some charisma or sales skills are required.
Heel Realization: His antics in Season 4 cause him to have one of these, though while he does try to keep Pied Piper as ethical as possible in the subsequent seasons, he does retain his more negative, petty and egotistical, traits for the rest of the series.
Hot-Blooded: Described as a ticking timebomb of pent up rage. While he's generally a meek and insecure coward, Richard breaks into a passionate, angry rant almost Once an Episode.
Jerkass Has a Point: In season 3, he arrogantly tells Gilfoyle and Dinesh that they cannot scale Pied Piper’s algorithm without him. The two dismiss him, call him an arrogant prick and aim to scale Pied Piper all on their own. But as it turns out, they are utterly baffled and confused by the machinations of Richard’s complex compression library, and realize that they really can’t do it without him.
Lousy Lovers Are Losers: In "Customer Service", Richard ends up sleeping with Liz and according to her the sex was horrible in every single respect. It actually ends up saving her marriage with Dan because at least he isn't that bad. He pretends he thought was bad for him too and it's a case of No Sparks, but it's clear by the way he talks he thought it went fine. Played for Laughs when the exchange becomes an Overly Long Gag
Liz: As bad as it was, you know, and it was bad, um...
Richard: Okay.
Liz: Like... really... awful.
Richard: I get it.
Liz: I just... If there's an upside to any of this, it would be that I realize now what I have in Dan.
Richard: Silver lining, so that's nice.
Lovable Nerd: While he's far from flawless, Richard is generally a likable and endearing guy due to a combination of his genuine devotion to his craft and overall awkwardness.
One-Man Army: Purely in a coding sense. When properly motivated, Richard can accomplish tasks that entire teams of world-class coders can't do. Tellingly, when most of the Pied Piper Employees leave in Reorientation, Richard is able to finish their entire workload by himself.
Mistaken for Gay: Richard is mistaken for gay by his ex-girlfriend, who overhears Jared telling Monica that he's Richard's (business) partner.
Mistaken for Pedophile: Played With in the first season, as he says the wrong thing at the wrong time when a neighborhood mom and her preteen daughter walk by.
Moral Dilemma: Richard's main problems in the show come down to him being The Fettered and he is called out many times by his friends who still operate on snap decision making without seeing the potential ramifications of every decision Richard makes. Ultimately, he chooses that Being Good Sucks, but he won't abandon his ethics and become what he hated about Silicon Valley in pursuit of fame/wealth So he chooses to shut down Pied Piper once he learns it will cause massive strife due to its ability to break any encryption system
Richard: I was just trying not to make bad decisions.
Mr. Vice Guy: Richard is obsessive, has poor social skills, and is prone to making short-sighted mistakes, but he's also generally portrayed as a relatively decent and sympathetic guy whose desire to do good through the power of tech is genuine.
No Social Skills: He's a socially awkward and timid nerd who's super intelligent but lacks people skills.
Never My Fault: Richard will often try to hide his wrongdoings if he feel he can get away with it to often hilarious effects like trying to steal Gwart's program or messing up all of the gangs plans at Hoolicon.
Saying Too Much: Richard has a habit of telling people things they don't need to know. For instance, after Endframe fired their cybersecurity engineer, Seth, Richard goes to console him and tells him that they didn't do anything to break through his security.note  This ends up causing Seth angrily threaten to hack into their system and sabotage their company.
Made worse later in the episode, when Seth ends up apologizing to Richard and saying he's not going to hack into their system. Richard is initially grateful but then lets it slip that Gilfoyle wasn't worried at all. This causes Seth to fly into an even greater rage and makes the exact same threats to Gilfoyle over the phone.
Socially Awkward Hero: Richard's people skills are very bad, to the point where he can't even look most people in the eye when talking to them. He's gotten progressively better at it as the show continues, though he still has a bad stutter and a tendency of putting his foot in his mouth.
Too Dumb to Live: He takes his secret skunkworks plans to the office, after a whole night of planning, and a specific directive to shred all evidence.
Took a Level in Badass: It's subtle, but as he grows more confident with himself and more involved in the business side of Silicon Valley (especially its ruthless politics), he gets this. It culminates in Season 5 when he is able to inspire his new employees to believe in PiperNet and ultimately beat Gavin, Laurie and Yao at their own game in the season finale.
Took a Level in Jerkass:
In the beginning of Season 3, where he lashes out at everyone. Entirely justified as he feels he's being screwed out of his own company and nobody, except for Jared, has his back. He gets even worse in season 4, where he dismisses his friends' work on their excellent video chat application because it's not his own idea.
Even worse in later season 4, when Richard tries to hack into every visitor of Hooli Con with the Pied Piper app, only to have it all messed up because he hacks his ex-girlfriend's new boyfriend's screensaver, thanks to his jealousy revealing that he was the one who did it and it's revealed that Richard is the one who's responsible for Keenan's VR company being acquired by Hooli, which causes Erlich to lose their deal along with his job at Bream Hall and almost kill himself, and he lies about the whole thing.
Wild Card: Surprisingly, Richard has a tendency of acting spontaneously and recklessly during tense situations, which makes him an unpredictable opponent to his competitors. He has both benefited and suffered from this behavior at various points.
Younger Than They Look: One character mistakes him for about a decade older than he is and a doctor diagnoses him with his organs aging severely due to stress.