Action Girl: She commands her late brother's ship and is about the equivalent to an admiral in the Greyjoy fleet. And she has killed already.
Dark Action Girl: Yara is this by default, considering she's an Ironborn.
Aloof Big Sister: To Theon.
Alto Villainess: Her voice is deep and quite raspy. The "Villainess" part is downplayed after she seeks to save her brother.
Armor Is Useless: Totally averted in "Stormborn". Yara, who typically does wear the usual Greyjoy halfplate, is caught off-guard and has no time to don her armor when Euron attacks her flagship. If she'd had that opportunity, Yara may actually have stood a chance against her suitably plate-mailed uncle.
Aw, Look! They Really Do Love Each Other:
Despite the bickering and vicious mocking, she and Theon care about each other deeply. She even defies her father in organizing a rescue mission for Theon immediately after receiving his castrated penis. When Theon returns to Pyke again in Season 6, Yara—already on edge and a bit paranoid after Balon's death—is furious at first, but when Theon tearfully confesses that he's there purely to support her as the new ruler of the Iron Islands, she is stunned and untenses at once. All the bravado leaves her, and she nearly hugs him on the spot.
Yara also isn't terribly fond of her father, but still swears gruesome, bloody vengeance when Euron murders him. Even when they're arguing at the beginning of Season 6, Balon never threatens to disinherit Yara, and mentions he expects that she'll rule after he's dead—though in the very angry climax to their last argument he says that if she won't obey he'll make another who will (it's unclear how much he meant that last one).
In the books, Balon considers Yara his heir, given that he thinks Theon is outright dead, even though he could easily name his younger brother Victarion (cut from the show) as his heir, or even his other brother Aeron the priest. In fact this was a particular sign of favoritism by Balon, given how shocking the Ironborn consider it for a woman to rule, and he must have known it risked a succession crisis when anti-Yara lords rallied behind her uncles.
Badass Boast: See the quote at the top of the page. The end result might have been a total failure, but it's still pretty badass.
Badass in Distress: She ends up captured by Euron after he raids her fleet.
Badass Longcoat: Yara wears the ubiquitous longcoat and breastplate of the Ironborn. Suffice it to say, she pulls it off with aplomb.
Big Sister Bully: The second season sees Yara more or less treat Theon as a Butt-Monkey. That being said...
Big Sister Instinct: Despite everything, Yara does make it clear over the course of the following seasons that she does, in fact, care for her little brother. When Balon leaves Theon to die at the hands of the Boltons, Yara opts to go rogue and run a rescue mission. Though it amounts to little in the end, it does a lot to cast her in a better light.
Birds of a Feather: With Daenerys, as strong-willed women looking to make their mark in a patriarchal society. The admiration between the two when they first meet is instant and obvious.
Brother–Sister Incest: Theon really should verify who someone is before his fingers start wandering...
Calling the Old Man Out:
True to sibling fashion, she finally lets Balon have it in "Mhysa" after he decides to leave Theon to be tortured to death, ceaselessly degrading and dehumanizing him in the process. The result is pretty fantastic.
Yara: He's your son!
She demonstrates this again in the sixth season, giving her father a blunt dressing-down for the outrageous stupidity of their continued involvement in the war.
The Captain: Already the de facto commander of the Iron Fleet (well, most of it anyway...), she becomes the commander of Dany's armada after she and Theon swear themselves to support her cause.
Character Development: Yara spends a long time learning to respect Theon and work around his traumas and conflicts, all of which culminates in going along with his wishes entirely by sending him off to fight for House Stark in Season 8, letting Theon live the life he wants to live with no more than a sad smile and a sincere hug.
Cluster F-Bomb: After Theon's takeover of Winterfell and killing two boys to pose as the Starks when they escape, Yara lets him absolutely have it.
[...] You made them prisoners in their home and they ran away. Is that treachery? I call it bravery. The little boy prisoner made you a promise and you got mad because he broke it. Are you the dumbest cunt alive? A cunt. A dumb cunt who killed the only two Starks in Winterfell. You know how valuable those boys were. You are weak. And you are stupid.
Co-Dragons: Yara and Theon are Balon's children and the ones he enlists to carry out his invasion of the North, though Yara is clearly the one he favors more.
Composite Character: As her post-Kingsmoot story in the books was wrapped up with Stannis, who'd already been killed on the show, she instead takes over the role of her Adapted Out uncle Victarion.
Daddy's Little Villain: Is clearly much more favoured than her brother by their father and is similarly eager to aid his efforts in attacking the North. However, both are awesomely averted in the finale of Season 3 where Balon's disgustingly cruel dismissal of Theon as "not being a man anymore" and his desire to leave him to his nightmarish fate at the hands of Ramsay Snow cause her to openly disobey his command and sail off with her own team to save her brother.
Deadpan Snarker: Her sarcasm is so dry you can practically hear it snap. Theon's often her target.
Yara: [to Theon] You're a great warrior. I saw the bodies above your gates. Which one gave you the tougher fight, the cripple or the six year old?
Death Glare: Levels one bristling with Tranquil Fury on Balon when the two learn of Theon's capture and torture and Balon refuses to do anything about it.
****Demoted to Extra: In Season 3, only appearing in the finale. In Season 4 she only appears in one episode as well (though it's a memorable appearance), and is entirely absent from Season 5. However, come Season 6, she reaches POV character status as the star of the Ironborn plotline.
The Dragon: Is effectively this to her father's Big Bad in the second season's Stark/Greyjoy storyline.
Everyone Has Standards: She's ruthless — and still has standards.
Yara is disgusted when she finds out that Theon has apparently killed Bran and Rickon in the second season, because it was both morally wrong and robbed them of two valuable hostages.
Yara: The little boy prisoners made you a promise and you got mad when they broke it? Are you the dumbest cunt alive?
Likewise, Balon's disregard for Theon's torture and mutilation at the hands of the Boltons leaves Yara visibly livid, despite her own poor relationship with her brother.
"Eureka!" Moment: The moment she sees her uncle Euron Greyjoy at the Kingsmoot, she immediately realizes that he killed her father and openly accuses him of this.
A Girl in Every Port: When Ellaria asks her whether she has a boy in every port, she responds: "A boy, a girl. Depends on the port."
Heir Club for Men: Despite having the well-deserved Undying Loyalty of her own men, Yara's claim to the Seastone Chair is immediately thrown into doubt by Euron's sudden reappearance. The Ironborn vote for Euron even after he admits to killing Balon.
Hello, Sailor!: A rare female example.
Hidden Depths: She shows genuine concern for Theon after his actions at Winterfell put him in serious danger of being killed unless he were to come back to Pyke with her. She's also, as seen above, outraged that Theon would stoop so low as to murder children. Later, in making her alliance with Daenerys Targaryen, she agrees to Dany's condition that the Ironborn forswear their culture of piracy in exchange for the Iron Isles' independence. While she hesitates initially, she acknowledges that the world has moved on and it's time to leave their people's old ways behind if they want to truly prosper.
Iconic Sequel Character: Does not appear in the series until Season 2.
Icy Blue Eyes: Yara has remarkably piercing eyes, particularly when she's angry. This is demonstrated nicely by the Death Glare archived above.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Between her moral boundaries and the loyalty and relative affection she shows for her family, Yara shows enough heart throughout the series to set herself apart from the rest of the Ironborn, despite being a hard and ruthless raider herself.
The Lad-ette: Yara dresses as the other Ironborn do, is just as hard a drinker and tough a fighter as any of them, and loves the ladies just as much as any of them.
Last of Her Kind: With Theon's death during the Battle for the Dawn, Yara is the last of Balon's line and the second-to-last Greyjoy on Westeros. With Euron's death in “The Bells”, she’s the last surviving Greyjoy.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Pretends to be a common woman on the Iron Islands to gauge what sort of threat Theon is to her position. She isn't impressed.
One of the Boys: The other Ironborn consider her to be this, much preferring her companionship to Theon's.
One-Steve Limit: The character is named Asha in the books. The TV series changed it to avoid possible confusions with Osha.
Only Sane Man: Compared to the other Ironborn leaders including her own father, she's seemingly the only one with a basic grasp of large-scale political and military strategy. Balon's "plan" was to opportunistically attack the North purely because they were an easy victory while their army was away — then keep fighting to hold the towns and castles they'd captured long after that war in the south ended. TV-Yara even gives a variation on book-Asha's famous "pinecones and rocks" speech, pointing out that attacking the North of all places has brought them absolutely nothing — as opposed to say, trying to capture the mines of the Westerlands or the farms of the Reach (after all, winter is coming). She outright berates her father for trying to fight mainland armies when their strength is at sea. Only Theon also brought up these concerns — that the North was their natural ally and they should have teamed up against the Lannisters — but he caved because he wanted to impress his father.
Parental Favoritism: Yara has earned her father's favor. She's the only person he seems to show any affection for.
Pet the Dog: When she tries to persuade Theon to come with her instead of foolishly staying in Winterfell
Yara: Little brother, don't die so far from the sea.
Pirate Girl: It comes with being an Ironborn.
Put on a Bus: Barely appears after her major introduction in Season 2; only a brief 3 minute scene in Season 3, another brief 3 minute scene in Season 4 (which wasn't well received), then not at all in Season 5.
The Bus Came Back: Her primary story arc from the novels, the Kingsmoot, ultimately wasn't omitted from the TV series but simply pushed back to Season 6. Yara went from being a character casual viewers barely remembered in Season 5 to one of the standout parts of Season 6, widely praised by critics.
Replacement Goldfish: With two sons dead and the third one hostage, Balon considers her his heir.
Roaring Rampage of Rescue: She sets out to find Theon and kill his captors, but it's quickly subverted. When she finds him, Theon is brainwashed to the point that he doesn't even want to be rescued, and Ramsay shows up and butchers most of her men before forcing her to flee.
Rousing Speech: As fantastic a speech Theon gave in "Valar Morghulis", Yara delivers one about ten times more moving and passionate in "The Laws of Gods and Men".
Yara: They skinned our countrymen, and they mutilated my brother. Your prince! Your prince! Everything they've done to him, they've also done to you! As long as they can hurt our prince with impunity, the word "Ironborn" means NOTHING!
Screw This, I'm Out of Here!: After Euron wins the Kingsmoot, she and Theon go into exile rather than stay at the mercy of their murderous uncle, and a sizeable portion of dissident Ironborn follow them in taking the best Ironborn ships with them.
Second Episode Introduction: Introduced to the series during the second episode of Season 2.
She Is the King: She's vying to be the first female Ironborn ruler, and would have done so had it not been for her Evil Uncle Euron. Not to be outdone, she sails to Meereen and allies with Daenerys to take the Salt Throne and remedy the matter.
Sibling Rivalry: With Theon, although she doesn't consider him a serious rival and more of a lost boy.
Smug Smiler: Yara's default expression is a self-assured, cocksure smirk. Theon is frequently on the receiving end, at least in the second season.
Smurfette Breakout: In-Universe. She is Balon's only daughter, but is unquestionably the most successful and competent of all his children, posthumous or otherwise.
The Smurfette Principle: She's the only prominent female Ironborn shown onscreen (exactly as in the novels, in which the Ironborn are very misogynistic and her status as a tomboyish warrior is quite unusual).
Supporting Leader: Despite having the authority, Theon is still the main Greyjoy character of the series.
There Are No Therapists: She truly loves Theon, but when he still has PTSD when they're in Volantis in Season 6, she tells him that if he doesn't want to live he should just kill himself, or he should keep going — though she does apologize for being a little insensitive. This might seem cruel to us, but in the behind-the-scenes videos, the showrunners directly explained that "Yara isn't a trained psychotherapist", most people in Westeros don't really know about PTSD and the Ironborn, in particular, are more blunt than others, so they felt that it would be untrue to her background if she wasn't kind of blunt in this scene. Still, a lot of viewers went on to point out that despite the showrunners' justification, this still shouldn't have worked for Theon, as it likely wouldn't for anyone.
Tomboy: Yara can drink and fight with the best of them.
Worthy Opponent: Shows shades of this when calling Theon out on apparently murdering Bran and Rickon, noting that the boys' continued resistance of Theon and his Ironborn was a mark of bravery.
Ramsay also considers her as one during their encounter at the Dreadfort.
You Can't Go Home Again: After the death of her father, Yara loses her bid for the crown to her uncle Euron. Euron's first decree is to have Yara and Theon killed, forcing the two to flee.