Ain't Too Proud to Beg: Despite looking down on Walder Frey (or "The Late Walder Frey") throughout most of the series, she still tearfully pleads with him to spare Robb's life, even offering herself in his place. It doesn't work.
Always Save the Girl: A family variant. Catelyn will do just about anything she sees as necessary to protect her children, even if it severely screws up everyone else's plans. This tends to backfire, a particularly noticeable case being her attempt to free and exchange Jaime Lannister for her daughters.
Apron Matron: Not visually, but she's defined by her role in her family.
Authority Sounds Deep: Cat's voice is deep, fitting for the highest female authority in the North.
Bargain with Heaven: When Eddard first brought newborn Jon to raise in their household, she hated him so much that she prayed for the gods to take him away. Not long afterwards Jon gets inflicted with a near-fatal illness, which she would greatly regretted this and prayed that he would be saved. She promised that in exchanged for Jon surviving his illness that she would love him like he was her own son and have him legitimized as a true Stark. After Jon recovered, she refused to go through with her promise, and years later she thinks the gods are punishing her by destroying her family.
The Cassandra: Zig-zagged. Her safety concerns about Bran's climbing turn out to be more than justified. Her firstborn Robb consistently ignores her well-reasoned advice of being wary of the Greyjoys, Karstarks, and Freys, with disastrous results. On the other hand, she also tells her husband to trust Littlefinger, which is hands down the dumbest thing you can do in Westeros. And while she does warn Robb to be wary of the Freys, she also vouches for them, saying Walder Frey would never do anything to harm her.
Character Death: After despairing over Robb's death in "The Rains of Castamere", her throat is slit by a Frey. Unlike the books, she stays dead.
Crusading Widow: After Ned dies at the Lannisters' hands, she vows to get revenge on them: "We will kill them all."
Death Glare: While she is usually too Hot-Blooded to not simply explode in someone's face should they piss her off, the glare she fixes on Jon Snow while he is saying goodbye to the comatose Bran rivals the worst of Tywin's patented glares and at her father's funeral, she is able to keep Robb from breaking down in laughter at Edmure's Epic Fail of lighting the raft by shooting Robb one of these.
Death Wail: She screams when Robb dies in front of her, and you can tell in her final moments that that scream was her soul leaving her body before said body follows Robb to the grave.
Decomposite Character: Jon Snow essentially takes her place as the resurrected Stark in the books (assuming The Winds of Winter doesn't bring him back as well upon its release). The role of Avenger for the Red Wedding is given mainly to Arya who eventually kills Walder Frey and then extinguishes most if not all of his male descendants in one fell swoop.
Despair Event Horizon: After Robb is killed, she seems to lose the will to live as she doesn't even try to resist when the Freys proceed to slit her throat.
Did Not Think This Through: While she doesn't trust anyone but Brienne to exchange Jaime for the girls, considering that prisoner exchanges usually have a lot of backup to secure against any possible betrayals, how did she expect Brienne to actually pull this off? Additionally, she arrests Tyrion in Season 1, believing that he tried to have her son murdered since she was told that the assassin was using his dagger. When Tyrion asks the obvious question of why someone would be dumb enough to arm an assassin with their own blade, she is unable to answer.
Didn't See That Coming: She knew fully well that Walder Frey was a "dangerous man to cross" but it's quite clear that she never expected Frey would stoop to the level of violating Sacred Hospitality, wherein he kills their guests after offering them bread and salt and while celebrating a wedding.
The Farmer and the Viper: Unlike in the books, Cat becomes aware of Petyr's involvement in Ned's death and wishes she had let Brandon kill him years ago.
Fatal Flaw:
Her love for her children drives her to do incredibly irrational things (such as kidnapping Tyrion and releasing Jaime). Her release of Jaime, in particular, is one of the major factors that leads to the death of herself and Robb.
The woman is very stubborn to the point where she can be unreasonable. A good example of this is when she quickly laps up that Tyrion might be responsible for her son's attempted assassination, even though Tyrion isn't stupid enough to arm an assassin with a blade that he owned. Even after he saves her life, she still thinks that Tyrion might have something to do with it.
Fiery Redhead: Often times she can be very opinionated.
Genre Blind: Doesn't even consider that Tyrion was obviously being framed. As he himself noted, only an extreme imbecile would arm an assassin with their own weapon.
Going Native: She's become quite comfortable with her Northern home after being married off to Ned. Lysa Arryn later tells Sansa that her mother in her youth was quite a big eater and far less austere than when she was Lady of Winterfell, pointing out that she assimilated into Ned's world very easily.
Catelyn Stark: Take him to the stockade and bind him with every chain you can find!
Jaime Lannister: You've become a real she-wolf in your later years. (dragged off) There's not much fish left in you!
Happily Married: To Ned, with whom she has five children.
Heroic BSoD: Has a pretty serious one after Robb reveals to her, at the same time, that her father has died, and that Winterfell was burned, the inhabitants slaughtered, and that Bran and Rickon are missing. And when Robb dies before her eyes she loses it completely. In one of the History and Lore features for Season 2, Catelyn recalls responding to the news of Brandon’s death by locking herself in a room and refusing to eat for days.
Hidden Depths: Not that Catelyn was ever shallow in the slightest, but in the second episode of Season 3, she reveals whole new depths to her character to Talisa about her relationship with the baby Jon Snow: she initially wished him to die, and, when he did get seriously ill and she was riddled with guilt over wishing death on an innocent baby and apparently getting that wish, promised to love him as if he was her own child if the gods let him recover. She blames her failure to keep said promise for all the horror her family has endured.
Horrible Judge of Character: She's actually quite astute, warning Robb about crossing the Greyjoys and the Freys. But she makes several terrible errors of judgment with dangerous consequences (usually, in her defense, not without some good reasons).
Even though she doesn't fully trust Walder Frey, she has absolute faith that Walder Frey would never let any harm come to her, unlike her book counterpart who is fully aware of his sneakiness. As stated above, however, breaking Sacred Hospitality is practically unheard of in Westeros.
She has absolute trust in Unlucky Childhood Friend Littlefinger, who is behind pretty much everything bad that happens in the series, vouching for him before her skeptical husband who would never have given him the time of day otherwise. Leading directly to Ned's capture and execution.
She also believes that Tyrion is just as bad or worse than the rest of the Lannisters.
Also of her sister. Catelyn seemed to trust in her absolutely when she blamed the Lannisters for Jon Arryn's death and believed that Tyrion would receive a fair trial if brought to her. In her defense, she hadn't seen her in quite some time. It's not until they meet again does she realize how crazy her sister has become.
Hot-Blooded: Some of her more questionable decisions have been the result of her following her Mama Bear instincts instead of her sense of reason, such as her impromptu capture of Tyrion and her later release of Jaime, against both the interests of Ned and Robb respectively.
Hypocrite: She reams out Robb for sending Theon to bargain with Balon, telling him, "I told you never to trust a Greyjoy!" yet she expects Ned to trust Littlefinger on the basis that she's known him since she was a girl, while Robb and Theon are pretty much Childhood Friends and she also is confident Walder Frey wouldn't hurt her because he's her father's bannerman.
Hypocrite Has a Point: Robb ignores her advice not to recklessly break his vow to marry Walder Frey's daughter, saying that she has no right to criticize him after she went behind his back and freed Jaime Lannister. She might have been hypocritical, at least in Robb's eyes, but she ended up being right.
Ignored Expert: As written in The Cassandra above, Robb ignored her well-reasoned advice regarding the Greyjoys, Karstarks, and Freys, which resulted in the fall of the Northern army and House Stark.
It's All My Fault: Blames herself for the misfortunes of the family because she failed to keep her word in a Bargain with Heaven regarding the raising of Jon Snow as her own son. It's revealed in Season 6 that he's not Ned's illegitimate son by another woman, but their nephew.
Kick the Dog:
Her not treating Jon Snow like a son despite his love of her could be seen as this, though she does feel very bad about it. And then Season 6 reveals that Jon is actually Ned's nephew, not his bastard son. It makes the whole situation between Catelyn and Jon even more sorrowful and tragic.
Killing Walder Frey's wife, even after it's clear he doesn't give a shit about her and the poor girl did nothing to deserve it.
Laser-Guided Karma: Believes herself to be on the receiving end of this from the Gods, due to wishing Jon Snow dead in a moment of anger. Made even more poignant since she dies believing that Jon is the only son of Winterfell to survive.
Locked Out of the Loop: Ned never told her that Jon was his nephew and Catelyn never learned it. When they got married he didn't know her very well, so he stayed silent, but after many years of marriage and love he still kept the secret, most likely because the mere knowledge of this secret was dangerous. 
Mama Bear: Try to murder her son in front of her and she’ll threaten to make good on her word to slice the throat of her hostage! And the moment she tells Robb that after saving Arya and Sansa, they will kill all their enemies. Her first truly badass moment is putting up a fight against an assassin trying to kill Bran, grabs onto the former’s Valeryian steel dagger, and bites his hands. Catelyn’s fight holds on long enough before Bran’s direwolf Summer storms in and kills the assassin. From the DVD commentary track discussing that moment:
David: This is an interesting scene, because up until this point, Catelyn has really been the voice of reason.
Dan: Eh. After everything her family has been through, "kill them all" kind of IS the voice of reason.
Marriage Before Romance: At the end of Season 2, she tells Robb that she didn't love Ned at first, but they built their romance over time for the sake of their family.
My God, What Have I Done?:
Catelyn admits that she regrets having refused to love Jon Snow and treat him like a son, and believes that the misfortunes of her family are the gods' way of punishing her because she didn’t uphold her promise to legitimize and accept Jon as one of her own.
Moments before she confesses the above mentioned, she prayed for Jon to die of an illness when he was a baby because she hated the mere thought, let alone looking, at her husband’s illegitimate son. But when Jon really did get sick, she becomes horrified that her prayers were being answered and realized at that moment she was the worst person to wish death on a baby she knew is innocent. She made a Bargain with Heaven in an effort to save Jon, but when he did survive, she refused to uphold her promise of legitimizing Jon.
My Greatest Failure: Saving Littlefinger from Brandon Stark.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!:
Her capture of Tyrion really pisses off Tywin Lannister, and helps spark off a civil war between their families. Her only evidence was Littlefinger's testimony and even then, Ned insisted on a measured approach while she arrested Tyrion on the spur of the moment and then kidnapped him by taking him to the Eyrie.
Letting Jaime go is a huge mistake, considering that he is their only bargaining chip. Also, there was absolutely no guarantee that the Lannisters would agree to release Sansa and Arya, even if they got Jaime back. On top of that, it also undermines Robb's position with his vassels, not to mention making him look weak and unable to control his own people.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed:
As the wife of Ned and mother of the King in the North, she is the closest analogue to Cecily Neville, Duchess of York, who became the most senior power-broker of the Yorkist side apart from her own son, the future king Edward IV (i.e. Robb's counterpart). Much like Cecily, she definitely played preference among the children at her care (George, Duke of Clarence for Cecily, and Catelyn's own brood over Jon and Theon). However, she is definitely seen as more honorable, level-headed and less-entitled, compared to the real-life woman who got the unflattering epithet "Proud Cis," both for her haughtiness and temper.
Ironically, Catelyn also took on the attributes of Cecily's much-unwanted daughter-in-law, Queen Elizabeth Woodville, as the mother of two young sons endangered by the wars (Bran and Rickon)— proverbially becoming akin to Woodville's tragic Princes in the Tower.
There is also a bit of Catherine of Aragon in her, similar names aside. Both women were religious redheaded MamaBears who were originally intended as a bride for someone else but ended up marrying his brother after he died. Although Catherine did actually marry Henry VIII's brother Arthur but it only lasted for a few months and she swore until her dying day it was never consummated. Catelyn never married the elder Brandon Stark.
Non-Action Guy: She's a typical noblewoman and thus mostly defenseless. But this doesn't stop her when Bran is in danger. Nor when Robb's in danger during the Red Wedding.
Obnoxious In-Laws: To Talisa, initially. In "The Rains of Castamere", she finally seems to warm up to her after overhearing Talisa say that she's going to name her and Robb's child "Eddard" if it's a boy.
Oh, Crap!: She obviously realizes something is up when "The Rains of Castamere" starts playing and they bolt the doors during the Red Wedding. And then she finds chain mail hidden on Roose Bolton...
Only Sane by Comparison: She has her issues with Jon and seems reluctant to acknowledge just how much of a Crapsack World, whose culture of chivalry only belies rampant hypocrisy, Westeros really is, but she's definitely the smartest and most down-to-earth of the Tully siblings compared to her oafish, selfish brother and their completely insane, childish sister.
After the Season 2 finale, she might also count as the one sane person in Robb's camp, although this depends on how justified you think she is in releasing Jaime or whether it was a truly boneheaded decision. A point in her favour, at least, is that Robb's bannermen actively plot to murder Jaime, so she isn't wrong in thinking that they'd lost their only bargaining chip either way.
Once again in the middle of the conflict between Renly and Stannis.
And in "The Rains of Castamere", when Lothar Frey closes the doors and "The Rains" start playing, she is the only member of the Stark retinue that suspects something bad is coming. Well, her and Grey Wind, but he's stuck outside in a locked kennel and can't warn anyone.
Outliving One's Offspring: Dies after Robb (and her unborn grandchild) and she also believes Bran and Rickon are dead.
Parental Marriage Veto: She makes it plain she doesn't approve of Robb marrying Talisa, especially as he breaks his betrothal to Walder Frey's daughter to do so. However, she gradually warms up to Talisa...just in time for the Red Wedding.
Perfectly Arranged Marriage: According to the History and Lore videos, she believed she would have this with Brandon, who she was initially betrothed to. She ended up having this with his younger brother when Brandon was murdered. Despite the rough patch when Ned brought home another woman's child, their marriage has been pretty smooth sailing.
Please Spare Him, My Liege!: She had to persuade Brandon to not kill Littlefinger.
Prisoner Exchange: Tries to pull one off with the Lannisters — Jaime in exchange for the return of her daughters — but it doesn't go over too well. Still, due to Brienne's Undying Loyalty, she's still trying to retrieve Sansa and Arya.
Proper Lady: While she was a Tully, although she's gone native with the Starks. Still, she retains an air of refinement and mild strictness.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech:
Gives a very mild, but very pointed one to Renly in Season 2.
Catelyn: (reviewing Renly's troops) I pity them.
Renly: Why?
Catelyn: Because it won't last. Because they are the knights of summer, and winter is coming.
She tries to give one to Jaime about being a Kingslayer, but he retorts with quite an effective Shut Up, Kirk!.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: She's the red to her husband's blue and the blue to her son Robb's red.
Redhead in Green: Cat is a Fiery Redhead and majority of her outfits are darker shades of green.
The Resenter: She resented Jon Snow for being Ned's illegitimate son with another woman.
Settle for Sibling: After Brandon Stark's death, she married his younger brother Eddard, per cultural custom.
Shipping Torpedo: Catelyn displays visible disapproval of her son Robb's budding romantic relationship with field nurse Talisa Maegyr. This is because Robb is already betrothed to a Frey daughter as part of a pact with House Frey. And hell, she's right.
Silk Hiding Steel: Don't let her highborn lady-like demeanor fool you: she'll cut your damned throat if you think to touch her children with anything less than a hug.
Slashed Throat: At the hands of Black Walder Frey.
Sweet Tooth: As said by Lysa, "Cat always went for the sweetest thing." This may be where Sansa gets it from.
Tragic Hero: Despite her efforts to see her children safe, Catelyn spends her final days knowing Sansa is a captive of the enemy, Arya is missing, and believing Bran and Rickon are apparently dead. When her firstborn son is murdered right in front of her, she gives up all hope.
Tranquil Fury: In the first season finale, Catelyn, mourning her husband, very nearly bashes in the Kingslayer's head with a convenient rock. Also apparent when she calmly but fiercely calls upon her father's bannermen to stage a citizen's arrest of Tyrion Lannister, who she blames for the attempt on Bran's life.
Unwitting Pawn: Baelish's manipulations hit her the hardest, as her impulsive reactions to an assassination attempt against Bran with a dagger that belonged to Tyrion and her credulity to an engineered letter sent by her sister Lysa Arryn are two of the major reasons why her house sparks the war with the Lannisters.
What the Hell, Hero?:
Gets one from Robb and Lord Karstark when she goes behind their backs and releases Jaime Lannister in the hope of getting Sansa and Arya back.
She gets him right back by pointing out how monumentally stupid breaking his deal with House Frey, just to marry a field nurse, is.
Wicked Stepmother:
While not abusive, she makes pretty clear to Jon Snow that she doesn't want him around. Catelyn dislikes Jon because Jon is Ned's son by another woman. While she and Ned were married, Ned claims to have conceived a son with this mysterious woman while at war and brings the baby boy home to Winterfell to raise himself, prompting Catelyn's resentment of the situation and her dislike of the kid. She comes to regret her dislike of Jon, an innocent child, after all the tragedy that befalls her and believes it was karmic retribution for betraying the promise she made to love him.
In the Season 6 finale, it's revealed that Catelyn wasn't so much Jon's wicked stepmother as his wicked aunt. Lyanna Stark is Jon's mother and Ned is Jon's uncle. After Lyanna dies following childbirth, Ned adopts his nephew Jon, raises him as his own, and passes Jon off as his own illegitimate child to protect Jon from Robert Baratheon's wrath. Catelyn may have acted very different if she'd known Jon was her nephew instead of the child her husband conceived with another woman as a result of infidelity.
Wistful Smile: She is seen with a small, sad smile as she watches her son Robb kissing his wife Talisa, who had just announced she planned to name their unborn child after Robb's late father if it's a boy. Catelyn is happy for her son and daughter-in-law, though she's clearly thinking about and missing her husband too.
Worthy Opponent: Despite suffering a Kangaroo Court because of her Mama Bear tendencies, Tyrion has great admiration for her. Justified because he was consulting Sansa after they both learn of how she brutally died.
Tyrion: I admired her. She wanted to have me executed but I admired her. She was a strong woman and she was fierce when it came to protecting her children.