Action Dad: Fights alongside his son in the War of the Five Kings.
Action Survivor: Davos is not exactly warrior, but he manages to survive three wars through guile and sheer luck.
Appropriated Appellation: Davos is an ex-criminal who smuggled badly needed provisions (including onions) to a starving, besieged castle, and was knighted for his services. Other nobles dislike him for being lowborn and call him "The Onion Knight," a title which Davos does not mind at all, even going so far as to use an onion in his sigil.
Arch-Enemy:
By the Season 3 premiere, has definitely become this to Melisandre, though she insists she's not his enemy.
Davos: You are my enemy!
Subverted by the start of Season 6, as he still doesn't like her, per se, but is not above asking her for help and seems to have a begrudging respect for her ability to have faith in something, even if he doesn't share it. This faith ends up paying off for a certain Lord Commander of the Night's Watch. In a HUGE way.
Once again returns to full Arch-Enemy status after he discovers that Shireen was burned to death by her faith.
In Season Eight, when Melisandre shows up at Winterfell to help the forces of the Living fight off the Army of the Dead, Davos immediately moves to intercept her and is fully prepared to cut her down where she stands, despite just witnessing her aid their forces by blessing Daenerys' Dothraki with flaming swords. He only lets her live because she assures him she'll be dead by morning. After the Night King is defeated and dawn starts to break, Davos immediately seeks out Melisandre, presumably to make sure she's good on her word and execute her if she's not (Melisandre stumbles into the snow, removes her glamour necklace, and drops dead moments later.)
Armour-Piercing Question: When Davos accuses Melisandre of stringing Stannis along with the Chosen One line, Melisandre protests she didn't lie, she was just wrong. Davos sadly replies "Aye, you were wrong. How many died because you were wrong?", and Melisandre can't answer. In the same conversation, after she says that Shireen's death was the only way, he responds "the only way for what? They all died anyway!"
Armor-Piercing Response: Delivers a rightfully furious one to Melisandre, who is stunned into a brief silence and ends the rest of her pleading to Jon Snow with much less confidence than before.
Davos: If he commands you to burn children, your lord is evil!
Arrested for Heroism: In the old days, we would have called this trope 'The Davos.'
His smuggling supplies into Storm's End won him Stannis's respect and loyalty, but Stannis does not consider rewarding heroism and punishing crime mutually exclusive. So Davos was knighted for his heroism, and then had his fingers cut off for being a smuggler.
Stannis: Do your knucklebones bring you luck?
Davos: Well, life's been good since you hacked 'em off, Your Grace. An' it's four less fingernails ta clean.
Stannis:'Fewer.'
Davos: Pardon?
Stannis: Four 'fewer' fingernails to clean. Never understood why you had to wear them.
Davos: Reminds me o' where I come from an' where I am now. Reminds me o' your justice. It was an honest punishment, an' you were good with the cleaver.
Stannis: You were a hero and a smuggler. A good act does not wash out the bad, nor a bad the good.
In the Season 3 premiere, after managing to find his way back to Dragonstone, he immediately calls Stannis and Melisandre out on their bullshit (moping and ordering prisoners burnt alive instead of continuing the fight), and eventually pulls a knife on Melisandre. Stannis reacts by having him thrown in the dungeons.
Again in "Mhysa". He gets arrested for setting Gendry free, in order to prevent Melisandre from sacrificing him. He only narrowly avoids being sentenced to death by Stannis by revealing the Night's Watch missive about the White Walkers marching on The Wall, as well as some unexpected support from Melisandre who claims Davos has a further part to play.
Gendry: Why are you helping me?
Davos: Because it's the right thing to do. And I'm a slow learner.
Badass Normal: As a commonborn smuggler he lacks the extensive combat training since childhood most of the fighting characters have, yet he holds his own in several large battles.
Birds of a Feather: Davos is one of the rare noblemen to be truly altruistic and dutiful to the realm as a whole aside from the Starks. Thus he is a natural addition to the Stark cause.
Book Dumb: Davos is an illiterate man for most of his life, but is one of the most intelligent characters on the show. He's a quick thinker and excellent strategist, and even the Book Dumb part is starting to disappear since Shireen began teaching him to read. In addition, he's exceptionally charismatic and has excellent negotiation skills and has a fantastic skill for making alliances which is proves crucial for Stannis and then later Jon and Sansa as he turns others to their cause, even winning over Lyanna Mormont.
Broken Pedestal: Stannis, especially after he learnt that Stannis agreed with Melisandre to sacrifice Shireen.
Brutal Honesty: This is why Stannis values him above other "nobler" Lords; he knows Davos will tell him the truth, even if it's not what he wants to hear.
Character Tic: Has a habit of clasping his hands behind his back when formally addressing nobles or if he's feeling thoughtful.
The Chains of Commanding: Stannis' promotions always comes with a reminder that Davos should never be complacent. They are not more rewards but rather more duties.
Classical Anti-Hero: Davos has the makings of true greatness but he often doubts his own abilities.
Composite Character: In the books, Ser Imry Florent is the one who leads the fleet in the Battle of the Blackwater. 
The Confidant: He is the only person who Stannis is ever willing to show even a little self-doubt in front of.
The Conscience: He explicitly states in "The Second Sons" that Stannis keeps him around because he needs someone to tell him when he's gone too far. He's left at Castle Black during Stannis's last campaign, and Stannis indeed does go too far in an attempt to ensure victory for his army. Emphasis on last campaign.
The Consigliere: Whether it's battle tactics, politics, or just an opinion in general, Stannis places great trust in him. Following Stannis's death, he becomes this for Jon Snow.
Cowardly Lion: He freely admits he's not much of a fighter and the thought of combat scares the hell out of him but he never backs away from danger either and puts himself on the frontlines along with Stannis and later Jon.
Creepy Souvenir: With a twist — the phalanges that he wears in a bag hanging from his neck are his own.
Commander Contrarian: Considers it his duty to tell Stannis when he is wrong, even while following his orders to the letter.
Cool Old Guy: While he's more middle-aged than old, he's nonetheless extremely crafty and charismatic and a mentor figure to younger soldiers.
Culturally Religious: Davos is either agnostic or atheistic, but still instinctively invokes the Seven when seeing something as shocking as Melisandre getting heavily pregnant within days and giving birth to a shadow monster.
Deadpan Snarker: He has his moments. It's especially notable when around the perpetually sullen Stannis.
Selyse: Did you see, Ser Davos? They're with our lord now, their sins all burned away. Did you see?
Davos: I'm sure they're more than grateful, my queen.
The Dragon: Stannis's right han....er, ''left''-hand man who also doubles as The Consigliere, as Stannis values his output more than anyone else's.
Earn Your Happy Ending: In spite of losing his only son and many of his friends and allies, Davos is one of the few characters in the series that has a happy ending. Even with all the dangers he's been through over the eight seasons, Davos ends the series as the newly crowned King Brandon's Master of Ships, happy with his position and role to help the kingdom, and presumably lives to a ripe old age in a comfortable life.
"Eureka!" Moment: During a reading lesson with Princess Shireen, Davos tells her about a nearly fatal run-in he had with the First Sword of Braavos, who was working for the unbelievably wealthy Iron Bank of Braavos, and suddenly he realizes that the Iron Bank has all the gold Stannis needs to hire sellswords to make another attempt on the Iron Throne in the aftermath of Joffrey's death.
Everyone Has Standards: Although Robb Stark was Stannis's enemy, Davos does not show any happiness or relief at the news of the Red Wedding.
Father Neptune: Spent much of his adult life at sea as a smuggler, and certainly fits the look.
Fingore: Stannis had his fingers cut off as punishment for smuggling. He still keeps the bones in a small bag around his neck.
Foil:
To Melisandre. Mel is a religious fanatic who is devoted to Red Rh'llor, the Lord of Light, a god that is foreign to Westeros. Davos was raised in the Seven Gods religion of Westeros, but does not particularly believe in the existence of any gods (at least, not at first). Mel also firmly believes in Black-and-White Morality, while Davos thinks most men can't be so easily categorized.
To Jaime Lannister. Despite coming from totally different backgrounds (a crabber's son vs the scion of the richest family in Westeros), both council a King who burned his subjects, both have maimed hands, both are Guile Heroes of the highest caliber, both are disrespected by everyone except their closest confidants, and both are very honorable men. The only other difference is that one had to kill his king to save the realm, and the other tried to save the realm by following his king's stubborn descent into madness.
To Tormund Giantsbane, as second-in-command to a vanquished leader. Despite Stannis having executed Mance Rayder, the two strike up a friendship while fighting for House Stark.
To Ned Stark. While they have polar opposite backgrounds, Ned being a warrior from one of the most respected families in Westeros while Davos was a poor smuggler and pirate who comes from poverty, they both serve under Baratheon men who value them for their friendship, immense loyalty, competence and willingness to tell them what they need to hear. They are both defined by their honesty, sense of duty and kindness but the key difference is that Ned was utterly blind to the cutthroat world of King's Landing and it led to his death while Davos is very aware of the kind of world he lives in and acts accordingly. They also have the difference of Ned being a seasoned soldier and an excellent swordsman, one of the few to match Jaime Lannister in combat, while Davos freely admits to being a poor fighter who relies on his wits and diplomatic skills to achieve his goals.
Four-Star Badass: Commands the Baratheon fleet in Season 2, and ends the series as King Brandon Stark's Master of Ships.
Friend to All Children: He has a knack for talking to children with respect, and in return they quickly trust him.
God Is Evil: He accuses the Lord of Light of being evil when he lashes out at Melisandre.
Godzilla Threshold: Invokes this when negotiating with Lyanna Mormont by pointing out the North has got bigger problems heading their way than just the Boltons.
Davos: The real war is between the living and the dead and make no mistake, my lady...the dead are coming.
Good Angel, Bad Angel: The good, with Melisandre as the bad.
The Good Chancellor: Stannis plans to make him Hand of the King and has him serving as his Number Two at Dragonstone. Davos takes the position very seriously.
Davos: I understand (being sentenced to death), but since you have not unnamed me Hand of the King, it is my duty to advise you against it.
Good Parents: Along with Ned Stark, one of the few genuine good fathers to his offspring in the series. Discussed for tragedy with Salladhor Saan after Mathos dies.
Saan: But, Davos, you were a good father.
Davos: If I was a good father, he'd still be here.
Good Samaritan: What led him to relieve Stannis in the Siege of Storm's End. He had heard of them starving in the castle while the Tyrells held camp, and resolved to brave the waters of Shipbreaker Bay, bringing food and supplies because to him the people in the castle, despite being lords and highborn, were starving and reduced to straits just like he was growing up in Flea Bottom.
Guile Hero: Despite his rough appearance, Davos is intensely charismatic (and indeed helps to compensate for Stannis's complete lack of charisma), and uses it to good effect to bring people like Salladhor Saan into Stannis's service. And despite looking like your stereotypical Old Soldier, Davos has only once drawn his sword, and clearly prefers to get by on his considerable intelligence than with violence. His charisma, honesty, and diplomatic skill leads to several unexpected alliances for Stannis, first with Salladhor Saan and then with the all-powerful Iron Bank of Braavos (an institution he formerly tried to rob and who have neither forgotten nor forgiven) into backing Stannis on pure nerve and implacable logic.
The Heart: To Stannis Baratheon, as weird as that might sound. Davos is the only man that can make Stannis reason and reconsider where not even Melisandre, Selyse or even his bannermen can even come close... which explains why Stannis made sure to send Davos away when he decided to sacrifice Shireen.
Heroic BSoD: Losing it a bit after the Battle of Blackwater, becoming extremely depressed and taking unnecessary risks with his life. He recovers relatively quickly.
Heroic Self-Deprecation: Davos makes it clear that he doesn't have a very high opinion of himself. In Season 7, he also admits to being a terrible fighter.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Stannis and later with Jon Snow.
Hidden Depths: For all his insistence that he is a bluff and simple smuggler, he shows surprising acumen when it comes to political dealings. He is the one who manages to convince Lyanna Mormont to support the Starks when Jon and Sansa fail to do so and gets Stannis a considerable loan from the Iron Bank.
Hollywood Atheist: Growing up in Flea Bottom and being told of some new "true god" in each new port he docked in made him consider that gods were something people made up to give themselves hope. This is in clear contrast to the Book canon, where Davos is the odd man out in Stannis's court not because he is an atheist, but because he remains a firm believer in The Seven.
Honest Advisor: As Maester Cressen puts it, Stannis is surrounded by fools and fanatics and Davos is the only one who tells him hard truths.
Honour Before Reason: In "Second Sons", when Stannis offers to let him out of prison if he swears never to raise a hand to Melisandre again, Davos agrees, but makes it clear that he will not stop speaking against her if he feels she's leading Stannis astray.
Stannis: (Amused) You have little regard for your own life.
Davos: Quite little, your grace...verging on none.
Humble Hero: In a show where almost all characters are prone to bluster and grandstanding, Davos stands out as being a modest, easy-going man who's just trying to do the right thing.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: While Stannis is a very capable leader, Davos is the one who can assemble his army, and acquire ships from pirates and smugglers. He's also the one who convinces the Iron Bank to give Stannis a loan for his war efforts, as he has better social skills than Stannis. He plays this part too with Jon and Sansa since they have no idea how to gather allies among nobles.
Iconic Item: His bag of fingerbones that he wears on a cord around his neck, which he considers lucky since those bones are what bought him a title, lands, a keep and a better future for himself and his sons. He loses the bag in the battle at Blackwater Bay.
Iconic Sequel Character: He does not appear in the series until Season 2.
Ideal Hero: In this Crapsack World, Davos is a shining example of a heroic character with his rescue of Gendry.
In-Series Nickname: The Onion Knight. Originally, the name was meant as an insult by the nobility who despised him because he was a commoner who bought his knighthood with a pack of onions and salt fish. However, Davos took the name with pride and made the Onion his family sigil.
Insistent Terminology: Most people think Ser Davos was a pirate. He insists he was a smuggler, though the distinction is lost on people like Stannis.
Davos: I was never a pirate, I was a smuggler.
Shireen: What's the difference?
Davos: Well, if you're a famous smuggler, you're not doing it right.
Shireen: My father says a criminal is a criminal.
Davos: Your father lacks an appreciation for the finer points of bad behavior.
He also objects when the Iron Bank refers to him as a thief. He counters that a smuggler doesn't steal things, they just move things that someone else stole.
Intergenerational Friendship: With Shireen Baratheon. He gives her toys and talks with her, she offers to help him read and visits him when he is imprisoned.
I Owe You My Life: Not just to Stannis for not killing him, but because Stannis gave his family a future.
Ironic Echo: In "Garden of Bones", while smuggling Melisandre to the cliffs near Renly's camp:
Davos: Someone once told me the night is dark and full of terrors.
Irony:
Tragic flavour; he didn't want to accept the knighthood and only did it because he wanted a better life for his son. Serving Stannis eventually leads to the death of Matthos, killed in action during Blackwater.
When Stannis sentences him to death, Melisandre of all people saves his life because she concedes that Davos will be needed in the fight ahead. The irony makes Stannis ''laugh''.
On a personality level, a character with one of the keenest awarenesses of the greyness of morality in the Seven Kingdoms, being a former smuggler who was elevated to the nobility and so was unblinded with the narratives of honor and legend with which many of the others can delude themselves, is also one of the most genuinely noble, decent and heroic characters in the whole series.
It's Personal: After learning about Shireen's death, he demands that Jon allow him to personally execute Melisandre for the princess's death. When Jon decides to exile her instead, Davos warns her that if he ever sees her again, he will kill her himself.
Knight in Shining Armor: Not a straight example, because he doesn't wear armor, but he's one of the very few unambiguously good non-Stark characters and is a knight. It's thus a welcome development that he has now become the leading retainer of the resurgent Kingdom of the North, together with Brienne.
The Lancer: To Stannis's Hero. Unless you consider Stannis a villain, then he's the Token Good Teammate. Following Stannis' death, he serves as this role to Jon Snow, being a great asset in recruiting forces to take back Winterfell and also being his second-in-command along with Tormund Giantsbane. Following Jon's coronation, Davos serves as his second most important adviser after Sansa and unofficial Hand.
The Main Characters Do Everything: Davos joins the Starks after the deaths of Stannis and his family. It is his idea, for some reason, to resurrect Jon Snow. He somehow negotiates for help from the wildlings. He becomes an adviser and leads men into battle, despite only being a smuggler who relies on stealth. Even Sansa does not understand why he came to join them
Meaningful Name: Commands Stannis's war fleet. Invoked, he created his own surname and chose one that reflected his life at sea.
Morality Chain: To Stannis, and both are very well aware of it. Davos even says to Stannis that the reason Stannis freed him from prison was because Stannis knew Davos would talk sense into him.
Morality Pet: To Stannis. Davos is Stannis's only servant who he treats with respect... most of the time.
My Greatest Failure: Davos's reaction to his son's death in the wildfire explosion at Blackwater has shades of this trope.
My Master, Right or Wrong: Tells his son emphatically that he doesn't believe in any God, but if he had to choose one, then as far as he's concerned, Stannis would be it. He plays this off against Maester Cressen as well.
Nay-Theist: Stannis points this position as illogical since Davos continues to hold it after witnessing Melisandre's powers first hand. True to this trope, however, Davos's continued rejection of the "true god" is likely less about not believing and more about not wanting to worship something that terrifying. He flat out spells it out to Melisandre while asking for her to resurrect Jon Snow, saying he wants the help of a Lady of Black Magic, not her Lord of Light. Later, when he finds out what happened to Shireen, he doesn't deny that R'hllor demanded the sacrifice, but instead accuses a god who demands the death of a young girl of being evil.
Davos: Fuck him then. Fuck all of them. I’m not a devout man. Obviously. Seven gods, drowned gods, tree gods, it’s all the same. I’m not asking the Lord o’Light for help. I’m asking the woman who showed me miracles exist.
Never Learned to Read: Due to his humble origins. Davos's wife and son tried to teach him in the past, but it's suggested he was wary of that because they were trying to convert him through holy books. Shireen decides to teach him and he finally learns.
Nice Guy: Davos is undoubtedly one of the most honorable, noble and dignified characters in the series, which is ironic when you remember that he was a smuggler. He stands out among Stannis and his supporters for being a down-to-earth, morally upstanding knight able to relate and be friendly to almost everybody. Not surprisingly, the plot twists in the course of the series eventually culminate in him becoming one of Stark House's main allies.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: If the sacrifices to the Lord of Light are actually useful, his decision to save Gendry from Melisandre indirectly leads to another sacrifice of royal blood. And this time Shireen is the one who is sacrificed. Zigzagged, however, in that even with the sacrifice, Stannis and his men all died anyway.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished:
The reason he was Fingore'd by Stannis. While he did saved the Stormlands troops when it was under siege during its, it did not excuse his past crimes that Stannis believed should be punished.
His decision to free Gendry. See above.
Non-Action Guy:
Claims to be a poor fighter which is probably true as he lacks four fingers on his right hand and never had any highborn training. His mind and no-nonsense attitude is better than any sword he could use.
Averted in Season 6 and 8 where he draws a sword and joins several large battles if still as foremost as characters like Jon or Sandor.
Nouveau Riche: Davos is unusually wealthy for a knight; given the extremely important service he rendered, he was given some of the most prosperous lands in the Stormlands. Also subverted, given that Davos was a very, very good smuggler prior to going straight. A rare honorable and heroic example. Also, unlike other examples like Janos Slynt and Littlefinger, he's more humble about it.
Odd Friendship: With Stannis, Salladhor Saan, Shireen, Gendry, Jon Snow and Tormund Giantsbane.
Oh, Crap!:
When he sees that the single Lannister ship in the mouth of the Blackwater Rush is empty and pouring wildfire on the water.
Had a small one in the last episode when Arya threat Yara with cutting her throat when the latter talk about killing Jon Snow. Considering he witness how Arya was more than capable to kill several wights in a row, his fears are justified.
Only Sane Man: With a stubborn king, a religious fanatic, an insane woman and a self-interested pirate as allies, Davos is easily the most level-headed. This continues even after he moves on to others' service, such as House Stark.
OOC Is Serious Business: Davos actually disobeys Stannis in attempting to kill Melisandre, illustrating succinctly just how large a threat Davos perceives Melisandre to be as well as how unbalanced his grief over his son has made him.
Outliving One's Offspring: Unlike in the books, where Davos had seven children, in the show, Matthos is an only child, adding more drama to his demise.
Papa Wolf: He is protective of his son Matthos, as well as Shireen whom he loves like a daughter of his own. Later on, he starts to prioritize the safety of Gendry and Jon Snow.
Parental Substitute: With Shireen Baratheon, Jon Snow and Gendry.
Fanon collectivity refers to these three and sometimes others as Davos's adoptive children.
Plug 'n' Play Friends: With Jon Snow, whom he becomes staunchly supportive of after Stannis is killed, despite prior interactions being limited and cordial in the main.
Rags to Riches: Grew up in Flea Bottom as the son of a crabber and was a smuggler. However Stannis knighted him as a reward for smuggling food into Storm's End and even made him their Hand. Stannis even tells him "You'll be the first crabber's son to ever be the hand of the King." All this before he even learns how to read. At the end of the series, Davos is part of the Small Council in King's Landing.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: Red to both Stannis and Melisandre. The latter is somewhat ironic as Davos is represented by water and Mel is represented by fire, but Davos is definitely Red to her Blue in personality.
Reformed Criminal: From smuggler to knight, and then lord, Admiral of Stannis's fleet, and King's Hand.
Refuge in Audacity: Stannis sentences him to death, and Davos accepts it. However, Davos reminds Stannis that he is still his Hand, and as such he counsels Stannis against killing him.
The Rival: To Melisandre, for the position of Stannis's right hand.
Rousing Speech: Gives an epic one to get Stannis the money from The Iron Bank of Braavos.
The Social Expert: In sharp contrast to Stannis, Davos is exceptionally canny and good at talking to people and extremely skilled at getting support for Stannis' cause. He proves just as valuable rallying support for Jon and Sansa and keeping the warring factions together to prepare for the invasion of White Walkers.
The Southpaw: He is left-handed, same as Liam Cunningham in real life.
Shipper on Deck: In Season Eight, Episode 1, suggests to Varys and Tyrion Lannister that Jon and Daenerys get married so that the Seven Kingdoms can be ruled by 'an honorable man and a just woman.'
Street Smart: As a former smuggler, Davos is well acquainted with the seedy underbellies of both Westeros and Essos, and still has many friends and acquaintances (especially Salladhor Saan) who prove very useful both to him and Stannis. He also remains a capable smuggler, though he's "lived within the law for 17 years."
Suspiciously Similar Substitute: To Ned Stark — a Baratheon king's most trusted friend who acts as The Consigliere and can be trusted to tell him what he doesn't want to hear. The key difference is Davos is about a million times more aware of the cutthroat climate of Westeros.
Team Dad: When he joins up with Jon, he's the oldest member of Jon's retainers and the only one who was a father once. His interaction with Gendry in season 7 is similar.
Davos: Don't mind me, all I've ever done is live to a ripe old age!
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Delivers a short, but very effective one to Melisandre in regards to her trying to justify murdering Shireen.
Davos: If he commands you to burn children, your lord is evil!
Tragic Hero: The deaths of his son during the Battle of the Blackwater.
Tranquil Fury: Davos spends the entirety of his conversation with Melisandre after Shireen's death barely choking back tears and rage, and judging by how he immediately asks Jon to kill her, he's trying not to kill her himself.
Trauma Conga Line: He outlives Matthos, Shireen, Stannis and Jon Snow. Jon comes Back from the Dead, but the others don't.
Unaccustomed as I Am to Public Speaking...: Loves to play up his humble, plebeian origins in an apologetic way before delivering accurate, powerful and convincing dissertations worthy of the best statesman. This is both out of genuine humility and an awareness that bragging in any way of his eloquence or intelligence is not going to be well recieved by the very people he is trying to win over to a cause. The result is that the arguments he follows up such self deprecating introductions with tend to be highly effective and compelling.
Undying Loyalty:
To his lord King Stannis, which he frequently displays.
Despite his misgivings about waging war against enemies that outnumber them, he remains loyal to Stannis and will follow wherever he leads. In spite of Stannis cutting off three of his fingers, which is lampshaded in-universe by Salladhor. Davos explains it's because Stannis raised him up to nobility, which ensured Matthos a future Davos could never have dreamed of providing for.
Salladhor Saan: You Westerosi are funny people. Man cuts off your fingers, you fall in love with him!
A more subtle instance of this happens when Davos is stranded on an islet in Blackwater Bay after the destruction of Stannis's fleet. When a ship sees him and sends out a boat to investigate, they ask him which king he serves. Davos knows fully well that they might well be serving Joffrey, and he doesn't even know if Stannis is alive. He still answers "Stannis Baratheon".
When he's thrown in a dungeon under charges of treason, Davos remains loyal to Stannis and when Shireen asks him if he really is a traitor, he accepts that he is. Furthermore emphasised in "Mhysa", when Stannis prepares to sentence him to death for letting Gendry escape, Davos informs him that he'll fully accept that if it's his will, but since he's not removed him as Hand of the King yet, then as Hand, he'd advise Stannis that it would be a mistake.
Following Stannis's death, he has now shifted it to Jon Snow as he is one of the many among the crowd to proclaim him King in the North.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Salladhor Saan.
Davos: Salladhor Saan is an old friend. I've known him for 30 years. I never trusted him.
We ARE Struggling Together: His relationship with Melisandre. Davos openly mistrusts her and works to thwart her on several occasions.
Melisandre: I'm not your enemy.
Davos: You are my enemy!
What the Hell, Hero?: Not him, but he's had to dish this out a number of times for Stannis (and, has even tried to do so with Melisandre without much luck). He's the only one allowed to get away with it, and all.
Working-Class Hero: A competent commoner who learned his trade on the seas before he was knighted.
Wouldn't Hurt a Child: Davos frees Gendry to stop Stannis from burning him and is horrified when he discovers what happened to Shireen.