Accentuate the Negative: Jorah tends to find faults in everyone Daenerys meet.
All Love Is Unrequited: His Bodyguard Crush on Daenerys is not working in his favor and although Daenerys does love Jorah, it's not romantically.
And Starring: Unusually, starting in Season 4, Iain Glen received the "with" credit at the end of the cast list, with nobody else following him to receive the "and".
Anguished Declaration of Love: To Dany, who is moved to tears by it:
Jorah: I love you. I'll always love you. Goodbye, Khaleesi.
Astonishingly Appropriate Appearance: His House's sigil is a bear, and he's as big, burly and hairy as one.
Awful Wedded Life: Jorah sold slaves in a desperate attempt to make his wife happy. When Eddard Stark discovered his crimes and Jorah was forced to flee in exile, Jorah's wife abandoned him.
Back-to-Back Badasses: With Daario Naharis and Grey Worm. He even performs a Combination Attack with Daario on the final enemy. In "The Long Night" he teams up with Daenerys to fight off wights.
Badass Bookworm: As they sail through the ruins of Valyria in Season 5, Tyrion begins quoting a book passage describing the Doom... and to his surprise, Jorah cap off the final lines for him.
Becoming the Mask: Originally traveling with Daenerys and Viserys as an informant of Varys seeking to earn a pardon from Robert Baratheon. Gradually, he falls in love with Dany, defending her life on several occasions, and becoming a key ally in her plan to retake the Seven Kingdoms, even after he has secured his pardon.
Berserk Button:
Threatening Daenerys' life is the biggest for him, as some characters find out the hard way.
In Season 5, he shows that he has very little patience for Tyrion's sarcastic japes. When Tyrion scoffs at his predicament and desperate plan, the otherwise peaceful and stoic Jorah responds by punching him in the face.
Black Sheep: Aside from his current reputation, Jorah is a northerner fighting to place the Mad King's daughter on the throne of Westeros. A girl who has lived most of her life outside of Westeros and the daughter of the same king who was deposed by Ned Stark, the man to whom Jorah owed allegiance.
Bodyguard Crush: He develops one for Daenerys. Doesn't end well.
Boring, but Practical: His fighting method, the typical armored hack-and-slash method of Westerosi knights, is this in comparison to some of the more elegant fighting styles encountered in Essos. It shows in his fight with Qotho, and is best seen when Jorah, Grey Worm, and Daario fight off Yunkish guards in "The Rains of Castamere". Daario and Grey Worm are far more graceful in their movements, but Jorah is just as effective. For this reason, this video labels him as the best swordsman in the entire series.
Call It Karma: After getting exiled for selling poachers into slavery, he's captured by slavers himself.
Carpet of Virility: Adding to his bear-like appearance.
Combat Pragmatist:
Has no qualms about fighting an unarmored foe with his armor on, and in fact makes that a principal piece of his strategy to win the fight, trapping Qotho's blade against his armor and cutting open his face.
In Season 3, he begins counseling Daenerys to take a more pragmatic approach to her campaign to retake Westeros, without concern for the morality of her actions, in opposition to the more idealistic advice given by Barristan Selmy.
In the fighting pits he beats another fighter by removing the opponent's helmet and beating him over the head with it.
Composite Character: In Season 5, he takes some of Jon Connington's role from the books, particularly getting infected with greyscale while rescuing Tyrion from drowning on their way to Daenerys.
Cool Sword: In Season 8, Sam gives him Heartsbane, the Valyrian Steel sword of House Tarly.
Courtly Love: Deconstructed. His obsession with Lynesse destroyed his life, but his love with Daenerys made him a better person.
Crazy Jealous Guy: Jorah gets jealous of any man who offers Daenerys help and constantly advises her to push them away in the hopes that she'll become dependent on him alone instead. Daenerys catches on.
Cultured Badass: He's very well-read and speaks a few languages. He's also a deadly Combat Pragmatist with a highborn's training.
Culture Clash: While the Dothraki call him "the Andal," the Mormonts are actually blood of the First Men. The Andals are the Saxon invaders to the original Briton occupants of Westeros. 
Cultural Rebel: Jorah is one of the few Northmen to be an anointed knight (a calling associated with the Faith of the Seven and would require Jorah to convert from the Old Gods to the Faith of the Seven). As a result of his exile and travels, Jorah has become the most widely traveled and cosmopolitan Westerosi of his generation, despite the fact that he originated from the most insular and isolated part of the Seven Kingdoms. This is given a Lampshade by his nickname "Jorah the Andal" despite the fact that he's of the First Men.
Deadpan Snarker: He has his moments, mainly with Tyrion:
Jorah: Do you ever shut up?
Death of a Thousand Cuts: In "The Long Night", Jorah is stabbed multiple times, but keeps fighting until he's absolutely sure that Daenerys is safe.
Death Seeker: After being exiled for a second time, it becomes evident Jorah has lost a fair share of his will to live, and his return to the gladiator arena is partly out of a wish to die. Of course, having Greyscale doesn't help matters.
Dented Iron: In Season 6, his age and Greyscale infection are starting to catch up to him. Though he retains his skill, he has stamina issues compared to younger men like Daario.
Determinator: After being exiled by Daenerys, he spends some time Drowning His Sorrows, then kidnaps Tyrion Lannister, the most wanted criminal of Westeros, with the intention to bring him to Dany. He drags the dwarf around Valyria, withstands contracting the Greyscale and being kidnapped by slavers and sold to fighting arenas, and finally, when not chosen to be presented to the queen during a fight, he makes his way for himself by punching out his master. Then he wins the tournament and succeeds in getting Tyrion to Dany (with Tyrion's cooperation, to be fair). He gets exiled again, resolves to go back to his former master, sell himself back into slavery, and take part in fighting in the pits in front of Dany again. He wins again (though with a little luck this time), and manages to save Dany's life by throwing a spear at an assassin. All of that finally earns him her forgiveness, but by then his greyscale is so advanced that he cannot return to Dany's court. Dany orders him to Find the Cure!, so he goes to the Citadel where Samwell Tarly manages to cure him against all odds, using an extremely painful procedure. Jorah then returns to Daenerys, who is happy to take him back.
Despair Event Horizon: After Daenerys exiles him twice, Jorah volunteers as a warrior in Daznak's Pit in a last, desperate attempt to return to her good graces, or die trying.
Didn't Think This Through: Jorah's plan to kidnap and hand Tyrion over to Daenerys was doomed to failure from the beginning, as Tyrion himself points out. Even if they had managed to get to Meereen safely (which they didn't), what would stop Daenerys from simply executing Jorah once and for all? Instead, Daenerys spares Tyrion and exiles Jorah... again.
Died in Your Arms Tonight: At the end of "The Long Night", he dies in his beloved khaleesi's arms from the wounds he sustained.
Dirty Old Man: Downplayed. Jorah is old enough to be Daenerys' father, and he is in love with her. But he never tries to kiss her forcibly the way he does in the book.
Disproportionate Retribution: His exile for the crimes he committed, in his mind at least. Though Daenerys herself is appalled with this.
Doomed Protagonist: Jorah contracts greyscale, a hopeless condition, but Samwell Tarly manages to cure him.
Dramatic Irony:
Revealed in "The Wolf and the Lion" to be spying on Daenerys on behalf of Varys.
In "You Win or You Die", he protects Daenerys from an assassination that he was the indirect cause of.
Dual Wielding: Carries a pair of dragonglass knives for the mission Beyond the Wall in Season 7.
Dying Moment of Awesome: Jorah, who takes stab after stab from the wights for his Khaleesi, only letting himself die after the wights drop dead themselves.
Enemy Mine: With Tyrion, whom he initially takes prisoner and intends to give to Daenerys to gain back her favor, fully expecting she'll execute him. After the two almost died during the journey through Valyria and after being imprisoned as slaves, they seem to have accepted each other as partners in the mutual enterprise of escaping a very bad situation.
Everybody's Dead, Dave: With Jorah and Lyanna dead, House Mormont is officially extinct.
Everyone Can See It: In-universe, everyone and their mums seem to be aware that he's got a crush on Daenerys.
Viserys is the first who calls him out on it in "A Golden Crown".
Viserys: You stand there all nobility and honor. You don't think I see you looking at my little sister, hm? Don't think I don't know what you want.
Xaro Xhoan Daxos also mentions it to Daenerys in "The Ghost of Harrenhal", but she denies it at first.
Xaro: So, tell me, how long has your manservant been in love with you?
Daenerys: He's not my manservant and he's not in love with me.
In "Mockingbird", it is hinted that Daario Naharis is aware of Jorah's feelings, so he pats him in the back and proudly tells him that "she is in a good mood. He later makes Jorah admit it in "The Red Woman", and in "The Book of Stranger", he mocks him for being too old and not fit enough for 'riding' her.
Tyrion Lannister notices it, too.
Tyrion: He worships you. He's in love with you, I think.
Everyone Has Standards:
Despite disgracing his family he had the decency to leave Longclaw behind for his father.
When he is forced to fight in the fighting pits Jorah goes out of his way to not kill anyone.
The Exile: From Westeros, due to the crime of selling slaves. Later, he is formally banished from Meereen and Daenerys's side, when she discovers from Barristan how he was spying on behalf of Varys whilst in her service.
Failure Knight: He fell for a noblewoman who took him for everything he had. Soon he begins to fall for Daenerys.
Fatal Flaw: He dislikes bowing and scraping to people, whether they are queens, merchants, or slavers. This is both a virtue and a flaw: Westeros is the kind of place where this attitude can be deadly.
Felony Misdemeanor: Played with. By modern standards, the Westerosi hatred for slavery seems pretty reasonable, but the Essosi consider it to be a ridiculous overreaction. They consider the normal practice of forcing poachers into the Night's Watch to be more or less morally equivalent. And considering that other nobles in Westeros routinely partake in murder and torture, selling a couple of poachers into slavery seems downright tame in comparison! .
Find the Cure!: After she learns of his greyscale, Daenerys orders him to find the cure and return to her. He gets his wish after being treated by Samwell Tarly at the Citadel.
Flaying Alive: The treatment for greyscale involves removing every single piece of infected skin.
Four-Star Badass: To Daenerys as her commander-in-chief.
Friendly Rivalry: With Barristan Selmy. They both have much in common and are quite similar in terms of character, but each has his issues with the other. And while always friendly or at least polite with one another, they're both quite frank in expressing their reservations about the other.
Genius Bruiser: A capable and intelligent knight. Unfortunately, see Love Makes You Dumb...
Green-Eyed Monster: He's not fond of anyone who poses a threat to his close relationship with Daenerys. He dislikes all the men who try to approach her romantically.
In Season 1, it's hinted that he's jealous of Daenerys's husband, Khal Drogo. Although he's willing to support the marriage over whatever Viserys wants.
In Season 2, it's clear that he feels uncomfortable when Xaro Xhoan Daxos is near Daenerys. It just worsens when he learns about Xaro's marriage proposal.
Although not in a romantic sense, he is jealous of Ser Barristan Selmy in a professional sense.
In Season 3, he sees the mutual attraction between Daenerys and Daario Naharis, which he doesn't approve of at all. In Season 4, he becomes deeply hurt when he sees the half-dressed Daario leaving Daenerys's chambers in the morning. According to the Word of God, 'he is both incredibly jealous and a bit angry with Daenerys for falling for a man he considers so unworthy of her.' In fairness Daario Naharis is kind of a dick about it.
As of Season 7, the list of rivals just doesn't end when, as soon as he is reunited with Daenerys and returns to her service, he catches a glimpse of the increasing attraction between her and Jon Snow, who is of similar age to Daenerys. Downplayed in that he takes a liking to Jon and hands the Longclaw sword back to him.
Heroic Sacrifice: Jorah dies defending Daenerys from the wights. He survives to the end of the battle, but succumbs shortly after.
Hopeless Suitor: To Daenerys, to the point that his fan nickname is "Lord Friendzone". Heck, their first meeting is at her wedding to Khal Drogo, whom she eventually comes to love. Even after he dies, Daenerys is oblivious to Jorah's feelings, then hooks up with Daario Naharis, who often mocks Jorah about this. She dumps Daario after sending Jorah off to find a cure for his greyscale, but the moment he gets back she's making goo-goo eyes at Jon Snow. At the very least, Jorah seems to approve of Jon much more than Daario. Which makes sense, as Jon earned the approval of Jorah's own father Jeor, enough to inherit Longclaw from him. If Jorah had to lose out to anyone in the end, it might as well be a man like Jon.
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: Jorah is a big, hairy, hulking knight and his queen Daenerys is a small, waifish girl.
I Choose to Stay: He chooses to remain by Daenerys's side even after being pardoned and allowed to return by King Robert.
I Dub Thee Sir Knight: Earned his knighthood at the Siege of Pyke.
Impoverished Patrician: Put himself in this position by trying to cater to his wife's expensive tastes.
In-Series Nickname: Despite being a Northman, thus a descendant of the First Men, he's called "Jorah the Andal" by the Dothraki because he hails from Rhaesh Andahli (Land of the Andals), which is the Dothraki name for Westeros.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: Although he is in love with Daenerys, and jealous of every potential love interest of hers — Daario Naharis in particular — he knows that his feelings are unrequited. In spite of that he serves her, doesn't give much voice to his jealousy, and his greatest wish is to see her sitting on her throne and to be by her side.
He implies this when he declines Jon's attempt to return Longclaw to him, saying that it rightfully belongs to him and his future children, indicating that he's come to terms with any relationship between Jon Snow and Daenerys, who do fall in love with one another, although he believes that Dany is infertile so this could also be an averted example. It helps that, unlike Daario, he actually seems to like Jon.
I Warned You: His modus operandi regarding his counsel to Daenerys. It comes to bite him when Daenerys finds out that he had been spying on her.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He's had a morally sketchy past, has sold slaves and can be petty towards people who threaten his close friendship with Danaerys, but he's clearly on her side and genuinely thinks the world would be a better place with her as ruler of Westeros.
Irony: In "The Long Night", Jorah saves Daenerys' life using the Valyrian sword Heartsbane, which he received from Sam, whose father and brother were executed by Daenerys.
Kick the Dog: When Tyrion mocks his desperate plan to get back into Daenerys' good graces, the normally stoic Jorah loses his temper and slaps Tyrion so hard he faints.
Knight in Shining Armor: Not nearly as straight an example as Barristan Selmy (indeed, his armor's a rather dull, functional grey, reflecting his pragmatism), but he's definitely got his moments. Also Reconstruction in his case, as he began the series as a rather self-centered manipulator (selling out the Targaryens, to whom he had sworn an oath, to Varys and King Robert in exchange for a pardon). But when he finds someone truly worthy of his loyalty, and whom he also loves (Daenerys) he drops it immediately, Becoming the Mask and a rock-hard Targaryen loyalist, not to mention upright, kind, and honest, while still being reasonably pragmatic and ruthless towards the Targaryens' enemies.
Lady and Knight: The Knight to Daenerys's Lady. He's a classic example; he loves Daenerys but knows his feelings are unrequited, so he dedicates his life to protecting and serving her.
The Lancer: He's the Number Two to Daenerys, her closest advisor and one of her best fighters.
Last of His Kind: Outlives his cousin Lyanna by just a few minutes; his death marks the extinction of House Mormont.
Last Stand: During the Battle for the Dawn, he chooses to fight to the end to protect Daenerys. He succeeds but at the cost of his life.
Last Words: Upon collapsing from his injuries, battered and caked in blood, Jorah whispers, "I'm hurt", and though he tries to say more, his strength abandons him and he dies in Dany's arms.
The Leader: Of Daenerys's Queensguard.
Leeroy Jenkins: Was the second into the breach at the Siege of Pyke, behind Thoros with his flaming sword. He was knighted by the king himself for his bravery. Averted as an advisor to Daenerys, where he tends to council restraint, instilling her with patience and doing things the right way, even if it is harder or longer.
Longing Look: For Daenerys on many, many occasions. Except the time of his banishment, he has been following her around like a lovesick puppy from pretty much her wedding day.
Love Makes You Dumb: Generally a knowledgeable, reasonable, and insightful person, it all goes out the window in his desperation to make his wife(and later, Daenerys) love him.
Manly Tears: We can see him struggling with his tears — both times Daenerys dismisses him and once in the brothel.
Miles to Go Before I Sleep: When cornered with Daenerys by wights in "The Long Night", he gets mortally wounded a half-dozen times over, but refuses to stay down and keeps fighting to protect her. Only when Arya kills the Night King and all the wights die along with him does Jorah finally stay down and dies from his wounds.
The Mole: Originally served as an informant for Varys. He later becomes the mask and serves Daenerys loyally.
Morality Chain: To Daenerys. Out of all her supporters, Jorah is the most loyal, and believes the most out of all of them that she will be a good and just ruler when she ascends the Iron Throne. His death in the Battle for the Dawn is the beginning of Daenerys's Sanity Slippage. Combined with Rhaegal and Missandei's deaths in the following episode, and the deterioration of her relationship with Jon Snow, Daenerys ends up completely losing it in the penultimate episode of the series, burning down King's Landing with Drogon while her army sacks the city.
Mr. Exposition: As a seasoned advisor and mentor, one of his roles consists in providing information to Daenerys, who is a newcomer. The producers even refer to him as "Jorah the Explorer".
Number Two: Daenerys considers Jorah this and relies on her advice and opinion more than that of Ser Barristan(who she only recently met) and Missandei. She consults him in private after dismissing her council about her misgivings for riding to Westeros and listens to him when he counsels mercy.
Perma-Stubble: He never really grows a full beard.
Post-Victory Collapse: After holding off dozens of wights and protecting Daenerys in spite of serious wounds, Jorah collapses once they're all shut down by the Night King's death, knowing his queen is now safe. He succumbs to his wounds soon after.
Private Military Contractors: After being exiled from Westeros as a fugitive, Jorah became a sellsword and served with the legendary Golden Company for a while, before meeting Daenerys.
Rasputinian Death: Jorah is stabbed about fifteen or twenty times each and is still standing before he finally succumb to his wounds.
Red Baron: In Essos, he's known as Jorah the Andal.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: After Barristan Selmy joins Daenerys, Jorah becomes the Red to his Blue. Which is odd, since being The Spock and The McCoy respectively, the roles should be reversed.
Redemption Quest: To some extent, his loyalty and commitment to Daenerys is driven by his need to atone for souring his honor in Westeros and initially spying on Daenerys.
Jorah: Better men than me have learned that what a man sells for gold, he can never buy back. He must earn it, by fire and blood.
Say My Name: "KHALEESI!"
Seppuku: His greyscale becomes bad enough for the maesters to plan to send him to die with the stone man. Because he's a knight, however, they give him a sword and suggest that he do with it as he will.
Shipper on Deck: According to the actor, Iain Glen, after his terminal illness and being exiled by his love interest, Jorah has already accepted that he will never be involved with Daenerys romantically and he is now content with simply being by her side as her friend and advisor. Therefore, when he meets Jon Snow, whom he comes to respect and admire, he subtly gives his blessing to him and Daenerys by not taking back the family sword, Longclaw.
The Spock: His pragmatism makes him this to Barristan's McCoy and Dany's Kirk.
Surprisingly Realistic Outcome: A slaver comments that due to his age, he would not be able to make it in the fighting pit. While Jorah does show he has what it takes, he is clearly at a disadvantage when he faces younger fighters of equal or greater skill. He has less stamina than them as well, and must resort to the style of fighting that has served him well.
His death in Dany's arms in "The Long Night" is set up to be a Dying Declaration of Love. He's far too injured for that: all he can do is croak out what sounds like "I'm hurt" before his multiple wounds catch up to him.
Taking the Bullet: At one point during "The Long Night", he pushes Daenerys out of the way to take wight's blade through the chest... and then keeps fighting.
Undying Loyalty: To Daenerys. She banishes him twice, and he returns twice, until he finally earns her forgiveness. He eventually dies in the Battle for the Dawn, fighting by Dany's side and protecting her until his last breath.
What You Are in the Dark: Jorah both plays this straight and deconstructs it. On one hand, given an opportunity to come back to Westeros with a full pardon and leave the hard life of Essos for good, he chose to remain loyal to Dany and personally foil an attack. On the other hand, as Dany and Tyrion note, given ample opportunity during several years of service, he never once divulged his past to her. Dany all but implies that had it not come to light in the shameful way that it did (being outed by Tywin) and had Jorah been honest from the start, she would have forgiven him.
You Can Barely Stand: Jorah is stabbed multiple times and struggles to stand straight, but doesn't falter until the fighting is done and Daenerys is safe.
You Can't Go Home Again: He sold some poachers into slavery and fled rather than facing Ned Stark over it. Subverted, as informing on Daenerys has earned him a royal pardon. Which he's ignored so far to continue serving Daenerys.
Your Days Are Numbered: Thanks to his greyscale infection he's pretty much doomed no matter what he does. Sam's treatment manages to save his life.
You Shall Not Pass!: Downplayed twice, first against Viserys when he tries to steal the dragon eggs and later against a battle-hardened Dothraki fighter. Fittingly, his family motto is "Here We Stand."
(drawing his sword against Qotho) No further, horselord.
Zombie Infectee: Jorah is infected with greyscale when he and Tyrion are attacked by the Stone Men. In true zombie-movie fashion, he keeps it hidden. Unlike most examples of this trope, Sam is able to properly treat it by skinning off the infected skin.