All for Nothing: Zig-zagged and played with. He wanted revenge on the Lannisters and Gregor Clegane, but his actions indirectly lead to his house's death by his lover and bastards, who also die afterwards — and Gregor is still kicking and committing plenty of atrocities until his brother, Sandor, finishes him off for good near the end. He could have simply agreed to Tywin's offer to at least have Gregor executed, but he wanted full scale revenge and a painful death for Gregor. However, as mentioned below, Oberyn's death kickstarts a chain of events that causes the eventual downfall of the Lannister family, which wouldn't have happened if he won the duel, thus getting his revenge post-mortem, albeit in a very complicated way. And while Gregor is indeed still kicking, he comes back undead after being succumbed to Oberyn's poison, with a sliver of his sadism and old personality intact, yet he is reduced to a mindless killing machine capable of only following orders without questionnote . It's unclear how much he is suffering underneath the helmet, but he is clearly a decaying mess that would've eventually decomposed for good if it weren't for Sandor getting him first.
Arch-Enemy: As with the rest of his family, the Lannisters, but he has a special level of hatred for Gregor Clegane, who killed his niece and nephew, raped his sister, and then murdered her. In that order. He announces this as much in his duel with the Mountain:
Oberyn: I am the brother of Elia Martell. And do you know why I have come all the way to this stinking, shit-pile of a city? For you.
Arrogant Kung-Fu Guy: He is a good fighter and brag about always drinking before a fight. He should have taken things more seriously though.
Ascended Extra: In the book he has only three notable scenes: his arrival in King's Landing, his offer to be Tyrion's champion and his death. In the series he is given a much larger role and his introduction in the season premiere indicated he would be a very important character, which made his sudden death seven episodes later even more of a shock than it was in the book.
Badass Boast:
"Tell your father I'm here. And tell him the Lannisters aren't the only ones who pay their debts."
Before his fight with Gregor Clegane:
Ellaria: You're going to fight that?
Oberyn: I'm going to kill that.
Badass Bookworm: He studied at the Citadel, which trains the Maesters. Perhaps not coincidentally, he apparently spent most of his time there becoming an expert in poisons.
Bastard Begetter: He's fathered eight bastard daughters who are now known as the Sand Snakes.
Be Careful What You Wish For: Oberyn wants more than anything to face the Mountain in single combat. Furthermore he wants to force a public confession from the knight, for his crimes against Elia Martell, in front of King's Landing. He achieves both but it sadly does him no good. An injured Ser Gregor brutally kills him whilst confessing his guilt.
Berserk Button: Hates the Lannisters just as much, if not even more than the Starks do. Simply hearing "The Rains of Castamere" is enough to piss him off.
Big Brother Instinct: Very protective of his sister Elia, for years he fended off lesser men for her, until he failed when Rhaegar came along, which only led to tragedy and a thirst for revenge during all of Oberyn's adult life.
Bling-Bling-BANG!: His weapon of choice is a highly ornate spear.
Borrowed Catchphrase: In the books, "This is not the day I die" is Jojen Reed's catchphrase. Unfortunately, Oberyn is not psychic, so the phrase is not used nearly as accurately.
Breakout Character: He was instantly a fan favorite and became one of the most popular characters on the show, launching Pedro Pascal to superstardom practically overnight.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Oberyn was quite brilliant during his time at the Citadel learning poisons but he found many of their teachings boring. He uses manticore venom because it is easy to extract.
Broken Pedestal: Oberyn had made fun of all of Elia's suitors, but even he was taken by Rhaegar's charisma and good looks. He was quite disappointed when he cheated on Elia by absconding with Lyanna Stark.
Byronic Hero: Handsome, charismatic, intelligent, stunningly deadly, and a good heart hidden under the hatred and hotheadedness. Unfortunately, he puts Revenge Before Reason at the worst possible time.
The Champion: For Tyrion.
Combat Aestheticist: Gives a show of spear-twirling before his fight with the Mountain and his actual fighting is every bit as awesome.
Combat Pragmatist: He uses light armor, constantly moves, and uses Hit And Run tactics against Clegane. He successfully gets Clegane to tire himself out, and manages to seriously wound him. Sadly, he forgets to be pragmatic when it really counts and is killed for it.
Cruel and Unusual Death: Punched so hard all his front teeth fly out, then has his eyes gouged out and skull crushed by The Mountain while fully conscious and screaming. He dies in a matter of seconds, but those are arguably the most agonizing final seconds in the entire series. While brief, it's still notably much worse than the book version.From the Books...
Cultural Posturing: Oberyn disparages mainstream Westerosi culture a lot.
Dance Battler: He favors a lot of jumps and flips.
Dashing Hispanic: With Dorne working as a fictional counterpart of Spain. He's hot-blooded, rather flirty with everyone, and a talented fighter and lancer who favors a quick weapon and style. This is also seen in his duel where he shows off to the crowd and wins them over to his side.
David Versus Goliath: His duel with Gregor Clegane, at least aesthetically. Actual ability-wise, Gregor was truly David in this scenario and needed his opponent to screw up in order to win.
Disciplined Spearman: Oberyn fights with a spear and he's a level-headed, cautious, and intelligent fighter who uses pure skill to take on Gregor Clegane himself. Unfortunately, his emotions get the better of him when he has Gregor dead to rights.
Dissonant Serenity: Witness his friendly talk with a Lannister soldier... while he has a knife planted in the wrist of another. He also shows this in his duel with the Mountain, much to Tyrion's shock and Ellaria's concern. He isn't intimidated by Gregor Clegane and even shows off his skills to the crowd and walks up to the Mountain with a smile before the fight starts.
Doomed Moral Victor: Though it cost him his life, Oberyn did get Gregor to confess to his part in murdering Elia and her children in front of the entire court, undoubtedly humiliating Tywin in the process.
Due to the Dead: On a meta level: the credits roll immediately after he is killed, and there's a slow, mournful version of the main theme playing over them, instead of the usual triumphant fanfare. It comes across as a send-off, akin to a character on 24 getting the "silent clock".
Eating the Eye Candy:
"Two Swords":
He and Ellaria ogle over a couple of whores.
When Olyvar is taking his shirt off too slowly, Oberyn pushes away the garment so that he can look at the prostitute's bare chest more closely.
"The Lion and the Rose":
He and Ellaria are visibly appreciative of a scantily-clad female contortionist.
He later propositions Loras at the Purple Wedding by giving the young man a smouldering stare, which can only be interpreted as, "I want to eat you for dessert tonight." Loras looks very interested.
Enemy Mine: The reason he decides to champion Tyrion. He knows he will face the Mountain, finally getting his chance to avenge his sister and her children. The fact this also ruins Cersei's efforts to have Tyrion killed is a nice bonus.
Erotic Eating: In "The Lion and the Rose," he and Loras sensually chew on food to signal their sexual interest towards each other.
Establishing Character Moment: He is first seen at a brothel picking out a prostitute for a threesome with himself and Ellaria. He then propositions Olyvar for a foursome. When a Lannister soldier interrupts his foreplay by singing "The Rains of Castamere," Oberyn casually stabs him through the wrist (reminding them that longswords make poor weapons in close quarters), then goes back to making out with Ellaria after he runs away. He also tells the Lannister guard that he'll live if he gets medical attention quick enough, showing that for all his love for fighting he's not needlessly cruel.
Everyone Has Standards:
For all his hatred of Tywin, not to mention a clear desire for vengeance against his house, he would never murder a Lannister child to punish them. Considering his nephew and nieces were murdered by Lannister men, it makes sense he would never want to lower himself to their level.
He keeps a stern Disapproving Look during the extremely distasteful War of the Five Kings parody that Joffrey had arranged for the royal wedding banquet.
During Tyrion's trial, he's probably the only person in the room (besides Jaime, Margaery and Loras) who doesn't seem to suspect Tyrion of anything at all.
When he visits Tyrion in his holding cell, he recounts a story of how it's obvious how much Cersei hates him; even when he was a baby, Cersei would blame him for Joanna's death and physically assaulted him (in a very cruel manner) before Jaime made her stop. It's clear that as much as Oberyn hated the Lannisters, he found her treatment of Tyrion very disturbing, which makes sense considering how close he was to his own sister.
Extreme Omnisexual: According to Tyrion, Oberyn is famous for "fucking half of Westeros". Across Season 4, Oberyn hits on men and women without a care.
Eye Scream: He screamed, Ellaria screamed, and those of us who saw it coming? We all screamed when Gregor gouged his eyes out before crushing his head, just like Elia was killed.
Fatal Flaw:
His lust for vengeance clouds his better judgment at the most crucial moment. Had he simply killed Gregor, which he could have done near-effortlessly, he'd have emerged from his fight unscathed.
For that matter, his fearlessness. Oberyn is incredibly self assured, confident in both his sexual prowess and fighting ability. Unfortunately, it's this same confidence that leads him to his grave; had he been a bit more cautious and wary, he likely wouldn't have gotten so close to the Mountain at the end of their duel.
Foil:
To Tyrion Lannister as noted by him in his first appearance. Both of them are second sons of their family who have a notorious reputation for being different from the norms of Westerosi society. Tyrion for his profligate Depraved Dwarf image and Oberyn's reputation as a Wild Card Depraved Bisexual. Tyrion is unable to take his lower-class lovers as wives, is forced into a political marriage against his will, and remains despised by his family. Oberyn is accepted in Dorne, and by his brother and sister, and enjoys a lifelong romance out of wedlock with a bastard, Ellaria Sand, and has several children. All this without even putting in a token effort to fit in. Like Tyrion, he's highly intelligent, sophisticated, and more culturally attuned and sensitive to the world than most nobles.
To Ser Loras Tyrell. They share a lot in common: both are formidable warriors who hail from a relatively liberal region of Westeros, non-heterosexual, are in a loving relationship with a person that they can't marry, dearly care about their only sister, brothers of a queen, hate the Lannisters, but are nevertheless allied to the family through political marriage, driven by revenge after the murder of a loved one, and dress in a manner which would be considered somewhat effeminate by people outside of their homeland. However, Oberyn is more passionate, with barely restrained Tranquil Fury and quite clear about his true feelings and sexuality. Loras is calm and restrained for the most part, more attentive to decorum and his responsibilities to his family at a Decadent Court, so he tries his best to conceal his true feelings and orientation beneath a genteel facade, becoming a Stepford Smiler with a lot of Suppressed Rage.
Fragile Speedster: In his duel with Gregor "The Mountain" Clegane, he eschews armor in favor of mobility, knowing that any direct hit from Clegane's BFS is likely to be a One-Hit Kill no matter how much armor he wears. He uses a combination of superior speed, movement, angles, and a ranged weapon to keep and close distance when necessary to utterly dominate the fight. Unfortunately for him, the Mountain's freakish strength and endurance and his own Suicidal Overconfidence make it his own downfall as well as the Mountain's.
Freeze-Frame Bonus: Prior to the trial by combat in “The Mountain and the Viper”, notice the squire who is wiping the blade on Oberyn’s spear with a cloth? You probably thought he’s cleaning it. But in the next episode, it turns out that he placed the manticore poison on the blade which Pycelle found out while tending on the comatose Ser Gregor Clegane.
Funny Background Event: In a blink-and-you'll-miss-it moment, when the guests at the Sept of Baelor are clapping for Joffrey and Margaery, Oberyn turns his head slightly to the left so that he can catch a glimpse of Loras. Oberyn swings both ways, and Margaery is a gorgeous woman, yet he clearly thinks that her brother is more attractive. This doubles as a Mythology Gag, as some of the characters in the novels consider the Adonis-like Loras to be prettier than his classically beautiful sister.
Gaydar: It works when he pursues Loras, whose orientation is the worst kept secret in the Seven Kingdoms, but it gives out a wrong signal when he probes Varys (who is asexual).
Gory Discretion Shot: Horrifically averted. They show everything from his teeth getting knocked out, the fingers going into his eyes, and eventually, his skull collapsing.
Head Crushing: After gouging his eyes out, Gregor squeezes his head so hard that it pops clean open.
Heartbroken Badass: Oberyn dearly loved his big sister Elia as well as his little niece and nephew, and is still heartbroken (and utterly filled with rage) over the circumstances of their horrifying deaths 20 years later.
The Hedonist: Oberyn's attitude to life can be described as such: "Live life to the fullest, suck the marrow, play hard, love hard, hate hard." He's fully aware this means he may well not live to be old, and he just doesn't care.
Helmets Are Hardly Heroic: Oberyn doesn't wear a helmet for his fight against Gregor, despite Tyrion's advice. In the books, he did wear a helmet, it didn't help him one bit against the Mountain when he gets his one hit at him
Hot-Blooded: Famous for his temper. Upon learning that Oberyn is in the capital, Tyrion Lannister remarks that they must find the good Prince before he kills somebody, or several somebodies.
In-Series Nickname: "The Red Viper." From the Books
Insistent Terminology: When he and Ellaria first see Ser Gregor.
Ellaria: "You're going to fight that?"
Oberyn: "I'm going to kill that."
Irony: In death, Oberyn ends up doing much more to expedite the downfall of the Lannisters than if he'd won his duel with Gregor, regardless of whether or not he got a confession from him. Had he won the duel, then Tyrion would have been found innocent, then likely either disowned or Reassigned to Antarctica, and would have had less reason to seek vengeance on the rest of his family by aligning with Daenerys. Instead, Tyrion is sentenced to death, and during his escape he murders Tywin. This in turn causes Tommen to become a puppet king of Cersei, resulting in his reign and his life ending in disaster, and results in Cersei's own, even more disastrous reign, ending in her own death, and Jaime's. Meanwhile, Ellaria ends up getting revenge for Oberyn's death by murdering Myrcella. As a result of this, by the end of the series Tyrion is the only prominent Lannister who remains alive.
Large Ham: He's fiercely brash, cocky and passionate by nature.
Leitmotif: Fittingly, Oberyn gets a dark, enigmatic Spanish guitar track.
Madness Mantra: Years of rage over his sister's brutal death come to the surface when he faces off against the Mountain as he repeats the same line over and over again.
Oberyn: Elia Martell! You raped her! You murdered her! You killed her children!
Master Poisoner: Being known as "The Red Viper", he's very knowledgeable about poisons which Tywin initially suspects that he might have a hand for poisoning Joffrey. And despite being brutally killed by the Mountain, he managed to inflict Manticore poison on him from his poisoned spear, giving him a slow and painful death.From the Books
Monologuing: Crosses this with Madness Mantra during his duel with the Mountain. It gets him killed.
Morality Chain: Judging by how quickly her character turned to the worse after his death, he was this to Ellaria.
Mr. Fanservice: Just look at that guy and his open-chested shirt.
Nerves of Steel: Witness him smiling and twirling around after Gregor Clegane breaks his first spear. This man has balls the size of Harrenhal.
No Sense of Personal Space: He raises Tyrion's chin with his index finger in "Two Swords" to make the shorter man look him in the eye when he speaks of Elia's grisly fate.
Passive-Aggressive Kombat: He engages in this with Cersei and Tywin in "The Lion and the Rose."
Pet the Dog: Oberyn may be hot-blooded, short-tempered, and single-mindedly driven by vengeance, but he has his softer moments.
In spite of his unremitting hatred of her family, Oberyn assures Cersei of her daughter's safety and happiness in Dorne in "The First of His Name", and promises to send Myrcella a gift from her mother — a ship — along with Cersei's regards. He admitted to Tyrion that he knew Cersei was putting on an act to get his sympathy but felt that she was semi-sincere anyway.
In Tyrion's literal hour of need he recounts the moment that he met him as a child. Oberyn and his sister Elia were expecting nothing short of a hideous monster due to the tall tales they'd heard travelling to Casterly Rock. But when Cersei unveiled him, neither could contain their disappointment, it was just a small child in their eyes. He caps this touching moment off by declaring he will fight as Tyrion's champion.
Oberyn: We didn't try to hide our disappointment. 'That's not a monster,' I told Cersei, 'It's just a baby.'
Polyamory: While he and Ellaria are perfectly happy together, they're not at all averse to sharing their bed with others. Several others.
Poisoned Weapons: He frequently employs them, as Gregor Clegane discovers. His daughter, Tyene, took it up from him as well.
The Power of Hate: The real reason he's at King's Landing. The speech he gives to Tyrion is laced with so much undiluted loathing it must be seen to be believed.
Considering the man he is most fixated on taking his revenge on is Gregor Clegane, arguably the most dangerous fighter in all Westeros and beyond, he certainly needs all the hate he can get.
Pyrrhic Victory: Subverted, he apparently gets his revenge on the Mountain at the cost of his own life, but Qyburn prevents Clegane from dying from the wounds and the poison inflicted by Oberyn.
Reaction Shot: When Tyrion tells him that he no longer partakes in whores because he's now married, Oberyn has a puzzled frown, as if to say, "Huh? What does marriage have to do with it?"
When Varys tells him that he's asexual, Oberyn's face can only be described as "does not compute".
Real Men Wear Pink: Michele Clapton describes Oberyn's style in this featurette as "It's actually quite a feminine look, but he wears it in a really masculine way." This probably explains why the pendant of his necklace features flowers◊. His clothing is also noticeably brighter and more colourful than what we typically see on Westerosi males.
Reasonable Authority Figure: At the trial in "The Laws of Gods and Men," Oberyn's the only judge who doesn't take the witnesses's testimonies at face value. In the History and Lore video for "House Martell" and his version of "Robert's Rebellion", even he thinks Aerys was insane for summarily killing Rickard and Brandon Stark when they asked for Lyanna and that the King should have disciplined Rhaegar for causing the mess to start with. He also notes that the Dornish fought for Elia's honor and her children more than they did for the Targaryens and while he considers Robert a usurper, he doesn't begrudge him and he also accepts that Tywin and Jaime backstabbing Aerys and taking King's Landing fell under I Did What I Had to Do. However the deliberate murder and rape of Elia and her children so as to clear the path for the next dynasty was a clear Moral Event Horizon.
Rebel Relaxation: He's unapologetically laid-back around public figures , thus showing his distate for King's Landing and the Royal Court in general and his casual defiance of Tywin Lannister in particular.
Red Baron: Commonly known as "The Red Viper."
Revenge: He's in King's Landing to pay his debts, meaning he hates the Lannisters more than perhaps any other character due to the murders of his sister (Elia, Rhaegar Targaryen's wife), his niece (Rhaenys), and nephew (Aegon VI) at the hands of Gregor Clegane, The Mountain, on Tywin Lannister's order.
Revenge Before Reason: This kills him. Oberyn could have easily finished off Gregor during their duel, but his insistence on keeping the Mountain alive until he confessed to murdering Elia gave the brute the time needed to kill Oberyn. Even more than in the books since Tywin actually agreed in giving Gregor to him, but Oberyn wanted the Lannisters to pay too so forcing a confession was even more important than just killing the Mountain.
Royals Who Actually Do Something: Oberyn is quite critical of the Sheltered Aristocrat trope and believes in the opposite. He's widely traveled across Westeros and Essos, knowledgeable of different cultures and ways of thinking and even studied at the Citadel in Oldtown, as opposed to learning from a Maester at Castle.
Oberyn: It is a big and beautiful world. Most of us live and die in the same corner we were born and never get to see any of it. I don't want to be most of us.
Rule of Symbolism: The pink rose patterns on Oberyn's wrap around belt and Loras' sleeves◊ at the Purple Wedding are identical. Only the fabric's background colour is different, and in Oberyn's case, it's actually green, one of the House Tyrell colours that is missing from Loras' outfit. This subtly hints at the two characters' attraction towards each other and their similarities. (See Oberyn's Foil entry for more details.) It's probably not a coincidence that the five-petal floral design on Oberyn's necklace◊ is a simplified version of the embossed/enameled five-petal flowers on Loras' armour◊.
Shirtless Scene: He has one in "Breaker of Chains".
Slasher Smile: Has these sometimes.
Suicidal Overconfidence: Ser Bronn states quite accurately that a man would have to be crazy to not have some fear of the Mountain and we see from the onset of their battle that Oberyn doesn't fear him at all. He wins his fight against Gregor Clegane... but instead of walking away, he keeps tormenting him, shouting for the Mountain to admit his guilt at killing Elia Martell. Unfortunately for Oberyn, Gregor is Not Quite Dead, and manages to yank Oberyn to the ground and kill him swiftly and gruesomely.
Symbol Motif Clothing: One of his outfits has stylized blazing suns with a spear, the sigil of his house.
Taking You with Me: Probably why he risked getting within arm's length of Clegane; even dying would be worth it if he could get the Mountain to confess to his crimes. It works; the Lannisters' reputation is shattered beyond the pale when Gregor confesses that he did in fact rape and gruesomely murder Elia and her children. Hell, if you want to stretch it, the revelation that Elia and her children were murdered on Tywin's orders could be considered part of what pushed Tyrion to kill his father before fleeing Westeros. So he did achieve everything he set out to do in life.
Tempting Fate: He is very relaxed and confident on the day of his duel with the Mountain, and it costs him. He even rebukes Tyrion when the later questions him on not wearing a helment.
Oberyn: Today is not the day I die.
Tragic Hero: His sister's death has haunted him for years, and he won't find peace until she is avenged. Although Oberyn dominated the fight with The Mountain, his overconfidence with The Mountain's seeming helplessness caused Oberyn to lose his guard... and it cost him his life.
Tranquil Fury: When Oberyn is angry, he doesn't shout or scream. He remains genial and seemingly calm, punctuated by a sudden burst of carefully planned violence.
He is one of the two characters that Tywin Lannister did not manage to chew out in a conversation, the other being Lady Olenna Tyrell. But unlike Olenna who seemed to enjoy the talks, Oberyn's hate for Tywin oozes from his body.
Then subverted during his fight with Ser Gregor. Oberyn gradually degenerates into a screaming berserker until he's got the Mountain on his back with a spear in his belly.
Troll: Cannot resist taking subtle verbal jabs at anyone with the last name of Lannister.
Unknown Rival: He's burned with hate for Gregor Clegane for twenty years. Gregor has no idea who he is when they meet and only views him as "some dead man."
Visual Pun: His schtick as the "Red Viper of Dorne" is backed up by his weapon of choice, a polearm with a wavy blade known as a "snake spear."
Warrior Poet: Literally. In "First of His Name," he writes a poem to one of his eight daughters.
Warrior Prince: Pedro Pascal studied wushu to get into the part - and it shows. Just look at these moves!
Weak, but Skilled: Oberyn isn't a powerhouse physically, despite being well-trained, especially compared to his nemesis Gregor Clegane. He's an incredibly skillful warrior and duelist, using pure ability to put Gregor on the ropes and chip away at him.
Weapon Twirling: Oberyn is not shy about showboating mid-combat, though he dials it back significantly when he's starting to lose the upper hand.
Where da White Women At?: He states this in the "House Martell" History & Lore short while talking about how King Daeron II Targaryen and his sister Princess Daenerys married his ancestors (before they could marry each other) to bring Dorne into the realm. He admits that just because they fought the Targaryens does not mean they didn't find them attractive.
"One look at those blonde, curly locks...It is not everyday that a man can ride a dragon."
Wild Card: He's described as such by the writers. Oberyn can be counted on for being violent, promiscuous, and hating Lannisters, but everything else is up in the air. It should be noted that he is this in-universe, however, to the viewer, he is far more reliable. His motive is clear, and, aside from co-presiding over Tyrion's trial, his methods are pretty straightforward.
Wouldn't Hurt a Child: Tywin asks Oberyn if he had given advice to Tyrion on what poison to use on Joffrey when they met. Oberyn states that while he hates the Lannisters and especially Tywin, he would never visit the Sins of Our Fathers on children who have nothing to do with the family grudge.
Xanatos Gambit: He had his weapons coated with manticore venom, an infamous poison that is apparently impossible to cure and promises a slow, agonizing death. It ultimately didn't matter if he won or lost his duel with Gregor; as long as Oberyn got in a hit, the poison would ensure Gregor's death and vengeance for Elia.
You Killed My Father: Is absolutely obsessed with taking his revenge on Gregor Clegane especially, but Tywin and the Lannisters in general due to the nightmarish rape and murder of his sister and her children. This is actually what gets him killed. He could have just left Gregor to die with a spear in his chest, but he just has to hear him say he did it, and confirm that Tywin ordered him to, so he gets close enough for Gregor to turn the tables.