The Ace: According to Jon, who was very close with Robb when they grew up together.
Jon: I was jealous of Robb my whole life. The way my father looked at him? I wanted that. He was better than me at everything. Fighting, and hunting, and riding. And girls. Gods, the girls loved him. I wanted to hate him, but I never could.
Always Someone Better: Seen this way by Jon, who reminisces that Robb was better at fighting, riding, hunting, and being a ladies man while they were growing up together. He's this to Theon too, who always looked up to him and felt he stood in Robb's shadow.
And Then What?: Asked verbatim by Talisa, who then points out that Robb is in the middle of a clash of kings, fighting to overthrow and kill King Joffrey but he seems to have no plan for what comes after.
Arranged Marriage: As part of the agreement with Lord Frey, Robb is bound to marry one of his daughters. He breaks the betrothal in "Valar Morghulis" by marrying Talisa Maegyr. In "The Rains of Castamere", he attempts to heal the breech by offering his uncle Lord Edmure Tully in his place, but... that doesn't turn out so well.
Awesome Moment of Crowning: Robb's is made all the more badass by not involving a crown at all. Instead, he's acclaimed as King in the North by his bannermen and certain Riverlords at Oldstones.
Assembled Lords: [drawing swords, kneeling] THE KING IN THE NORTH! THE KING IN THE NORTH! THE KING IN THE NORTH!
Badass Cape: He loves these. He wears one in almost all of his scenes after his crowning. It doesn't save him from death, however.
Badass Army: He leads one.
Badass Boast: Oh, many.
When sending away the spy with misinformation:
Robb: Tell Lord Tywin, winter is coming for him. Twenty thousand northerners are marching south to find out if he really does shit gold."
When sending Alton Lannister to King's Landing:
Robb: If she accepts these terms I will give her peace. If not I will litter the south with Lannister corpses."
He ups it in episode four of Season 2 where he absolutely crushes a Lannister host at Oxcross, and the viewers are shown the aftermath of the battle. Indeed, the victory is so decisive that Lord Bolton turns a statement of fact into a Badass Boast (which is also a testament to Michael McElhatton's skill):
Roose Bolton: Five Lannisters dead for every one of ours.
Batman Gambit: He pulls off one of these when he tells the Lannister scout that his army is 1) larger than it is and 2) is marching towards Lord Tywin Lannister instead of against Jaime Lannister. Even Tywin seems begrudgingly impressed.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Talisa, a surgeon he meets in the aftermath of Oxcross. They eventually marry.
Big Brother Instinct:
Subtly looks disapproving at Sansa's attraction towards Joffrey in "Winter is Coming" and protects Bran from Wildlings in "A Golden Crown".
He gets extremely pissed off when Lord Karstark kills the two young Lannister hostages, shouting, "THEY WERE BOYS!" when he tries to justify it and personally executes Lord Karstark shortly afterwards.
Blood Knight: Shows occasional signs of this.
Robb: The Lannisters have been running from us since Oxcross. I'd love a fight. The men would love a fight. But I don't think we're going to get one.
Broken Pedestal: Robb breaking his marriage vows ended up causing him to become this to his men in the third season. It persists well into Season 6, to the point where few houses support Jon and Sansa when they try to retake the North.
The Chains of Commanding: Starts to feel them in "Baelor", when he has to send two thousand men to their deaths in a battle with Tywin Lannister in order to defeat and capture Jaime Lannister. It only gets worse as the war rages on and his men begin to lose faith. In Season 3, his leadership decisions start to put him at odds with some of his more prominent men.
Cheated Death, Died Anyway: Robb needs Walder Frey's men to help him survive the battle with the Lannisters, which he does, but it requires him to enter a marriage pact with Walder Frey's daughter. He ends up getting injured - but not dying - on the battlefield, where he meets Talisa, falls in love with her, and gets killed by Walder Frey and his men in punishment for breaking his word.
The Chessmaster: Inverted. Robb is very much a Generation Xerox to his father, Ned. Unfortunately, this includes an utter inability to navigate Westerosi politics and make compromises. This includes marrying for love and executing Rickard Karstark, both needless events that spelled his doom. And just like his father, he ends up paying the price for it with his life.
Cool Big Bro: As the eldest Stark sibling, he's this to pretty much all the rest, especially to Arya and Jon Snow. He even gives Jon a hug before seeing him off to the Night's Watch.
Curb-Stomp Battle: Every tangle with a Lannister army he has ends up with him doling this trope out. He keeps a 5:1 casualty ratio.
Deadpan Snarker: Not often, but he has his moments.
When threatening to litter the south with Lannister corpses:
Alton Lannister: King Joffrey is a Baratheon, your grace.
Robb: Oh, is he?
When meeting Talisa:
Robb: You'd have us surrender, end all this bloodshed, I understand. And the country would be at peace, and life would be just under the righteous hand of "Good King" Joffrey.
When chewing out Edmure:
Robb: Tywin Lannister has my sisters. Have I sued for peace?
Edmure: No.
Robb: Do you think he'll sue for peace because we have his, father's brother's great-grandsons?
At the Red Wedding:
Talisa: But if she had her way I'd be back in Volantis playing my harp, and you'd be sitting over there eating blackberries out of Roslin Frey's hand.
Robb: Perhaps I've made a terrible mistake.
Decoy Protagonist: Robb was the main Big Good for the Starks in the first three seasons, all set to avenge his father and free the North from the Southern yoke and take over as head of the Stark household. But then he died at the end of Season 3. After that, Sansa Stark and Jon Snow take over his role and restore the Starks in command and liberate the North, with Sansa becoming the Head of the household as the second oldest of Ned and Catelyn's brood, and Jon Snow becomes Robb's successor. Made even more notable then in the books where we only saw him from the POV of those around him, while in the show he has his own storylines centered on himself.
Defrosting Ice King: Very stoic initially; Talisa defrosts him.
Despair Event Horizon: When Talisa is killed, he just crawls to her corpse, makes an effort to stand up and lets Roose Bolton stab him in the heart.
Didn't Think This Through: Instead of marrying Roslin Frey to keep the Freys on his side for the war effort, he marries Talisa out of love. Instead of putting aside his honor and simply holding him hostage, he executes Rickard Karstark.
Doomed Moral Victor: Admits it's starting to look this way in "The Climb";
Robb: I've won every battle, but I'm losing this war.
Due to the Dead: Defied by the Freys; as soon as he's killed by Roose Bolton, they savagely hack his head off and impale Grey Wind's head on top of his chest, so they can parade it in front of his dying men on the battlefield. Gets even more depressing when one considers that Ned and Rickon's bodies were returned/recovered so they could at least be laid to proper rest in the crypt below Winterfell with the rest of their family. Its never commented on but one can likely assume Walder Frey did not send Robb's body home. Poor guy doesn't even get to be buried in his homeland with his family.
Dull Eyes of Unhappiness: Once Talisa is slaughtered in front of him, he just...stares.
Elective Monarchy: Elected King in the North by acclamation of his bannermen. As it turns out, what the bannermen give, the bannermen can take away just as easily.
Embarrassing Nickname: The King Who Lost the North.
Et Tu, Brute?:
His reaction upon learning that Theon had seized Winterfell in his command tent.
Feels deeply betrayed by his mother Catelyn when she releases the Kingslayer (Jaime Lannister) behind his back.
Betrayed and killed by his bannerman Lord Bolton in "The Rains of Castamere," although he's too numb to register it.
Face Death with Dignity: According to Richard Madden, Robb standing and calling out to his mother Catelyn before his death is his way of letting her know he's accepted his inevitable death and that there's no point in fighting it.
Fatal Flaw:
Like his father, Robb suffers heavily from Honor Before Reason. He assumes he can win back Walder Frey's loyalty by making amends and that Frey will honor Guest Right. He also assumes Roose Bolton's unwavering loyalty as his bannerman. All of this culminates in betrayal and murder.
Robb also never heeds anyone's advice. He refused to listen to his mother about the Greyjoys and the Freys, and as a result is betrayed by Theon and later loses the Freys. Also, he ignored everyone (even his wife) wisely advising him to keep Lord Karstark as a hostage and executed him instead. This lost Robb the support of the Karstarks and forced him to return to Walder Frey for help, and we all know how that turned out.
A Father to His Men: His leadership style, as seen in "The Old Gods and the New", where he takes the time to mingle with the rank and file.
Four-Star Badass: Before hitting his twenties, he's a military commander who leads his own Badass Army of Northmen.
Generation Xerox:
To his father. Richard Madden even mentions this in Robb's featurette. Though there is one crucial difference that separates them, as pointed out by Catelyn herself: Ned entered into a political marriage during the course of Robert's Rebellion, and honored that vow, refusing to Marry for Love even if there might have been another woman in his life (and allegedly the existence of Jon Snow would imply that there was).
To his uncle Brandon, the eldest of Ned’s siblings. Like Brandon, Robb was the heir to Winterfell and reluctantly betrothed to a lady from the Riverlands. Both died while trying to help their father, who was executed by The Caligula and their sisters disappeared under mysterious circumstances.
Good Counterpart: Robb is this to Joffrey who is Robb's Evil Counterpart. They both rise to power around the same time frame of their fathers' deaths. Robb is characterized as being a beloved leader and tactician who doesn't shy away from combat while Joffrey is The Caligula and a Dirty Coward who would sooner let his guards do his dirty work for him. They both share the same flaws of making political enemies due to their rash behaviors (Robb's Honor and Joffrey's Greed). This ultimately costs both of them their lives, dying in a similar manner at a wedding within weeks of the same time frame.
Good Is Dumb: Zig-Zagged Trope. Robb starts his campaign (and kingship) taking everyone by surprise tactically and showing that he can show reason as well as honour (refusing to fight Jaime 1v1 is a good example). Then he makes mistakes later on, which start adding up...
The Good King: He aspires to this, and embodies some aspects of the trope. He is compassionate, honorable and good-hearted as king, strives to do the right thing, and fights alongside his men.
Talisa: What kind of king do you want to be?
Robb: I dunno [Beat] the good kind.
Guile Hero: As of "The North Remembers". He's pretty much required to be this, due to the fact that he is badly outnumbered by the Lannisters.
Heart Is Where the Home Is: Inverted; Robb breaks his betrothal to one of Walder Frey's Westerosi daughters to marry Volantene-born Talisa Maegyr. This doesn't end well; Walder is furious at Robb for breaking their pact, some of Robb's bannermen disparage Talisa as a "foreign whore" and it all culminates in both Robb and Talisa being murdered by the Freys at the Red Wedding.
The Hero Dies: In "The Rains of Castamere."
Heroic BSoD:
Theon's betrayal hits him hard.
Another one when the Freys kill Talisa, which makes Robb refuse to flee or fight back before Roose Bolton puts him out of his misery.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Theon Greyjoy until Theon's betrayal.
Honor Before Reason: His decision to execute Rickard Karstark for murdering two Lannister boys is a hard case of this. Both his mother and uncle advise him to keep Lord Karstark as a hostage to ensure the Karstarks would stay a part of their coalition, but Robb decides his crime is heinous enough that an execution is the only punishment that fits, and as a result loses a significant portion of his army.
Horrible Judge of Character: Robb considered Theon like a brother. He never understood that Theon saw himself as a hostage ready to be killed at any moment.
Hypocrite: When Edmure is reluctant to marry Roslin Frey, Robb pressures him into it, even though Edmure's situation is his fault since he jilted House Frey to marry Talisa.
Icon of Rebellion: For the North. Between Seasons 1-3. In Seasons 6-7, Jon Snow becomes this.
Impaled with Extreme Prejudice: By Roose Bolton, just after several arrows pierced his body.
Insult Backfire: When Jaime makes a point of referring to him as "boy", Robb's response amounts to "The boy who kicked your ass, bitch."
It's Personal:
Robb takes Theon's betrayal very personally, and demands that Theon be brought to him so Robb can kill him himself.
Robb invokes this from his siblings after his death — both Sansa and Jon have a special hatred for the Boltons because Roose was the one who finished Robb off.
Kick the Dog: He's quick to remind Theon that he's not one of them. Still, though, he later admits he considered Theon his closest friend.
Knight in Sour Armor: Especially as the war goes on.
The Leader: Of the northern cause. Type I.
Like Father, Like Son: He deliberately emulates his father's honesty, caring lordship, and sense of duty, and of course executes men he sentences to die just as Ned taught him. Unfortunately, this also includes Ned's weaknesses, which includes Honor Before Reason and inverted The Chessmaster, which proves fatal to him, just like Ned.
Loophole Abuse: As with his father, he does the honorable thing even if it would be wiser to do elsewise. However, he finds ways to still twist this to his advantage, or to do the intelligent thing without compromising his honor.
When his men capture a Lannister scout that was spying on their army, he sets the boy free to return to Tywin with a warning that he's coming for him, when actually he sends a skeleton army against Tywin and marches the bulk of his forces against Jaime.
He tells Roose Bolton's son when he goes to retake Winterfell from Theon that any Ironborn who surrenders will be spared, since this is not only honorable, but it means they're more likely to hand over Theon to them without a fight.
When Jaime challenges him to single combat to settle the war personally, Robb is perfectly aware Jaime is a better warrior and pointedly tells him that they both know Jaime would win, so Robb refuses.
Love Makes You Dumb: In contrast to the books, where he marries Jeyne Westerling out of a sense of honor (and hopes the Freys will understand), the televised Robb marries Talisa because he can't control his raging... love for her. It gets worse in Season 3, as he doesn't even realize how dumb it is to parade his new wife in front of his supposed-to-be-wife, not to mention supposed-to-be-father-in-law. From the books The context makes Robb seem more brash and impulsive than his book counterpart, who already got some criticism; no less than Tyrion Lannister was heard to observe, "Better to leave her with a bastard in her belly," after hearing of his folly with Jeyne.
Love Ruins the Realm: The newly re-established Kingdom in the North is as good as doomed the moment he forfeits his marriage pact with the Freys. It doesn't just cost Robb, his wife, and mother their lives but the lives of hundreds, if not thousands, of his men when they're massacred along with him.
Mangst: Upon hearing of his father's execution, he substitutes a nearby tree for one of the Lannisters.
Catelyn: You've ruined your sword.
Marry for Love: Forgoes his vow to marry a Frey girl in order to marry Talisa, who he has fallen in love with. The Freys are understandably insulted. They even kill him over it.
Memetic Badass: In-universe. He's known as "The Young Wolf", and Northmen trade tales about how he rides into battle on the back of a giant direwolf, that he can turn into a wolf, and that he can't be killed. All sides of the war note that despite his youth, inexperience and inferior numbers, he wins every battle he fights.
Military Maverick: Initially a green commander in charge, he frequently ignores senior bannermen who try to rein him in. This is apparently the main reason he gives Tywin Lannister such hell on the battlefield — none of Tywin's commanders can predict his movements because, between his inexperience, boldness, and confidence at his success, he's willing to take risks none of them would dream of taking, and pulls them off.
Modest Royalty: He doesn't wear a crown as king. Among the Five Kings, three kings — Robb Stark, Stannis Baratheon, and Balon Grejoy — do not wear a crown. Even his book counterpart wears a crown in the same style of those worn by the old Kings of Winter. From the books
Mr. Fanservice: Gets quite a few nude scenes.
My Sister Is Off-Limits: Just look at the Death Glare he gives Joffrey when Robb sees him making eyes at Sansa.
Nice Guy: An overall warm, righteous and compassionate man, rare traits for the leaders of The War of the Five Kings.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: His actions that lead to the Red Wedding come back to haunt Jon and Sansa three seasons later, as the Northern lords blame Robb for dragging their family members into war and getting them killed.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed:
Alongside his semi-namesake Robert Baratheon, Robb is a Decomposite Character of King Edward IV of the House of York, whose father was executed by his enemies, never lost a battle and ultimately damaged his effort when he made a secret marriage to Elizabeth Woodville, angering one of his supporters, Richard Neville, the Earl of Warwick. Unlike Robb, however, Edward IV got off lightly.
He also has some similarities (Young Conqueror genius tactician from the Grim Up North who ends up betrayed) with Charles XII of Sweden. In fact, they march to war at the same age in the show continuity.
Being a very young King who’s constantly underestimated by the people around him but turns out to be a great warrior, governor, and leader of men is similar to Edward III in The Accursed Kings books. That series is, by Martin’s own admission, a significant influence on this franchise.
He leads a rebellion against the crown, trying to secede the Northern half of the kingdom, like William Wallace (yes, the one from Braveheart). It helps that the North is a Fantasy Counterpart Culture of Scotland and Northern England, while the Westerlands are one to Southern England. Also, we have Tywin Lannister sharing many traits with King Edward Longshanks, while Robb shares his name with the first Scottish king, Robert the Bruce. Not to mention that like Wallace, Robb is betrayed by an ally and killed, letting Tywin Lannister (just like Edward Longshanks) win the war. Incidentally, Robb is played by Scot Richard Madden.
Not So Stoic: Once The Chains of Commanding start wearing on him harder, Robb's stoic demeanor begins to slip on occasion when his men harm the war effort or commit despicable acts. When he finds out Ned has been killed, Robb ruins a sword by smashing it against a tree in pure rage.
The Oath-Breaker: He breaks his oath to marry one of Lord Walder Frey's daughters by marrying Talisa. Walder perceives it as a major insult and slaughters Robb, Catelyn, and their men at The Red Wedding.
Odd Name Out: Robb's name does not match the trends of his siblings — their names end with either 'n' (Bran, Jon, Rickon) or 'a' (Sansa, Arya).
Offscreen Moment of Awesome: Leads the small party that captures the Kingslayer, Jaime Lannister, but not before the Lannister kills 10 men in the ambush. Only the return with the prize is shown.
Off with His Head!: Posthumous.
Outliving One's Offspring: Dies after witnessing his pregnant wife repeatedly stabbed to death.
Papa Wolf: He states to Talisa he must be this for every man, woman, and child of the North, as their king.
Pragmatic Hero: A rare example who also has Honour Before Reason tendencies. Despite being firmly on the "heroic" side, Robb is still willing to sacrifice 2,000 of his own men into battle as a distraction against the Lannisters (though he feels terrible about sending them to their deaths) and start a whole war that tore the kingdom apart and killed countless people just to get revenge for his father's death.
Proud Warrior Race Guy: One of the reasons Robb is respected by the Northmen and his followers is because Robb is almost always on the frontlines with them and has ample opportunity to show his skill as a fighter to them. In contrast to most other prospective kings in the war, who rarely fight on the front lines.
Rasputinian Death: Gets peppered with multiple crossbow bolts before being stabbed by Roose Bolton.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He will not be a dick to his subjects, is merciful to enemy combatants and will hear them out. He also follows Ned's example that the man who passes the sentence should swing the sword.
Rebel Leader: Tywin views him as a 'Rebellion in the North' as opposed to 'The King in the North'.
Red Baron: The Young Wolf.
Royals Who Actually Do Something: Once he's crowned the King in the North.
Screw the Rules, I'm Doing What's Right!: His opinion of marrying Talisa. If only he wasn't so blatant about it.
Sherlock Scan: He doesn't take long to realize Talisa is actually a noblewoman and not a simple nurse.
Shocking Defeat Legacy: Despite winning every battle, his reign is remembered for the occupation and sack of Winterfell by Ironborn while he was down south, and for the Red Wedding, which led to the unprecedented ousting of House Stark from power at the hands of House Bolton. It's Robb's tragic fate that despite being a Young Conqueror and military genius, his reign resulted in the absolute Darkest Hour for House Stark and the North in its entire history.
Lampshaded by Tyrion Lannister, who comments that Robb won every battle but still lost the war.
Shut Up, Hannibal!: This exchange with Jaime:
Jaime: Three victories don't make you a conqueror.
Robb: It's better than three defeats.
Shoot the Dog: The tactic he uses to destroy Jaime Lannister's army in Season 1. Robb sends 2,000 of his own men to die in a battle he knows they have no chance of winning. The least he does is acknowledge it.
Robb: I sent two-thousand men to their deaths.
Theon: The bards will sing songs of them.
Robb: Yes, but the dead won't hear.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: His romance with Lady Talisa runs on this. He finally lets his feelings for her be known when she tells him a story of how a slave saving her brother's life compelled her to never live in a slaver city again. Talisa is attracted to Robb because he is a good-hearted, ethical man who treats both his allies and his enemies with respect.
So Happy Together: With Talisa during the wedding at House Frey.
The Scapegoat: The Northern houses blame their conditions on his inexperience and wedding with Talisa. While not blameless, a lot had to do with his advisors backstabbing him (Roose Bolton and Theon Greyjoy), defying him (Rickard Karstark), making stupid choices in violation of his wishes (his mother Catelyn and his uncle Edmure Tully), or forcing his hand (Walder Frey refusing passage unless ridiculous payment is made).
Star-Crossed Lovers: With Talisa. She initially hates him because she sees him gravely wounding a soldier, but they're also separated by the Frey pact.
Strategy Versus Tactics: Robb was an excellent combatant, a great tactician, and led a clever campaign. Where he failed was from the top down with his grand strategy. His diplomacy and political maneuvers were questionable. He trusted men with his life that he had no reason to. He assumed Bolton would be honorable and died needlessly when he was proven wrong. His strategy seemed promising, but it was notably behind where it should have been as he lacked the next few steps of his plan to dethrone Joffrey.
The Stoic: Like Father, Like Son, as he rarely shows his emotions.
The Strategist: He appeared to be turning into this during his life, as, within one day, he managed to sneak up on Jaime Lannister, distract Tywin, defeat Jaime's army in the field, and capture Jaime, which provided Robb with an extremely valuable hostage. Subverted in that he was not only thinking up the plans, but was also leading his men and becoming very physically involved with the war. There's also the fact that whilst he runs rings around Tywin as a tactician, as a strategist Tywin runs circles around Robb as he knows the strategic imbalance between the Starks and the Iron Throne is too unmaneable and wins as a result.
Supporting Leader: Averted in the television series. While Robb fits this in the novels, he is upgraded to the status of the other leads in the onscreen adaptation where his status as leader of the Northern rebellion receives a significant amount of airtime.
Technician Versus Performer: His leadership of the rebel forces against Tywin Lannister. Lord Tywin is a good soldier and strategist due to hard and careful work, while Robb is a born conqueror. Ultimately, Tywin's exploitation of the strategic imbalance between the Iron Throne and the Stark kingdom, plus Robb's personal missteps, proves decisive in the Riverlands theater. Robb, on the other hand, bet the whole war on winning enough battles.
Too Clever by Half: Robb excels at battle strategy and is a born leader great at inspiring confidence in his troops, but his naivety when it comes to feudal politics proves to be his downfall.
Tragic Hero: Robb's initial success at rallying the forces of the North is cut short because, like his father, he's unable to follow through on the political compromises needed to strengthen his victory. This results in a series of errors that make him vulnerable to betrayal, culminating in breaking his marriage pact to the Freys and marrying for love.
Tranquil Fury: He does this a lot, but it really kicks in when he (correctly) accuses Jaime Lannister of injuring Bran. You can hear the sheer fury in every word, but his voice remains calm. It's clear that the only thing keeping Robb from beating Jaime to death with his own hands is Jaime's worth as a prisoner.
Too Dumb to Live: Although he's a clever man militarily, he still fails to see the full extent of the impending backlash of his marriage to Talisa. His attempts to mollify the Freys don't cut it.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom:
Had Robb not been rude to Tyrion when the latter returned to Winterfell after visiting the Wall, he would likely not have gone to the inn where he runs into Catelyn and she impulsively arrests him, thus kicking off the Stark/Lannister conflict.
Him sending Theon to the Iron Islands to negotiate with his father is another case of this. Instead of Theon convincing Balon to side with the North, as the two had planned, Balon instead pressures Theon into rejoining the Ironborn's side and partaking in their campaign against the North, leading to the sacking of Winterfell and a great deal of tragedy for Robb and Theon both.
His decision to break off his vow to Walder Frey in order to marry Talisa proves to be final nail in the coffin, as it leads to Robb, his wife and mother, and all of his loyal bannermen perishing in a mass slaughter at the hands of the Freys and Boltons.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Considers Theon his closest friend, yet most of their interactions consist of debates.
Warrior Prince: He's nobility rather than royalty, but definitely becomes one once he leads the Stark bannermen into war against the Lannisters. He becomes the King in the North by acclamation of his bannermen.
What the Hell, Hero?:
Gives a minor one to his mother after she spends a month at Bran's bedside, neglecting the castle and her younger son Rickon, who is six years old and disoriented by all the changes at Winterfell.
He's on the receiving end of one in "Garden of Bones", after a battle leaves thousands dead or injured. A healer lets him have it:
Robb: The boy was lucky you were here.
Talisa: He was unlucky you were.
He joins most of his men in giving one to his mother Catelyn when she releases Jaime Lannister.
Gets one from his mother when she learns he's considering breaking his agreement to marry a Frey daughter for Talisa, pointing out how completely idiotic this is.
Worthy Opponent: To Tywin Lannister, enough that Tywin acknowledges how badly he underestimated Robb and how talented the Young Wolf is at war. Not bad for a boy of eighteen.
You Are in Command Now: With his father in King's Landing and his mother busy kidnapping Tyrion, he has to take charge of Winterfell. With the death of his father, Robb becomes Lord of Winterfell and, not long after, is named as the King in the North.
Young and in Charge: Due to being the highest-ranking person in Winterfell, he has authority over a whole mess of experienced knights and retainers. Despite this, others underestimate him due to his youth. This dynamic is brought to the fore in "The Pointy End" when he calls his bannermen and begins to march south. In particular, it causes some tensions with Greatjon Umber but the Greatjon changes his mind when Grey Wind bites a few of his fingers off. Later, the Greatjon is the first in the Northern/Riverlands army to declare Robb as the King in the North.
Young Conqueror: Neither Tywin Lannister or his father believe Robb is up to the task but Varys points out to Ned that Robb would hardly be the first. Robb quickly proves himself one of the most skilled battle commanders in the series.