Abusive Parents: Hoo boy. His own father was willing to personally murder him.
Badass Boast: "How many brothers can say that they've killed a White Walker and a Thenn? I might be the first in history." Repeats it and modifies it later against two sworn brothers who're trying to rape Gilly and had just beaten the living hell out of him; "I killed a White Walker, and a Thenn. I'll take my chances with you."
Badass Bookworm: He spends most of his spare time in the library, doing research. This pays off when he establishes precedent for someone as young as Jon to become Lord Commander, and he hopes to find further information on how to combat the White Walkers — something that King Stannis approves of.
Band of Brothers: With Jon, Pyp, Grenn, and Edd.
Beware the Nice Ones: Midway through season 7, he gets so sick of the maesters refusing to take the threat of the Army of the Dead seriously that he steals as many tomes and scrolls from the forbidden archives as he can and flees northward with what he's stolen, hoping that he can make it to Winterfell and recruit people to help him study the texts for possible anti-undead measures there.
Big Brother Instinct: After Ygritte put an arrow through Pyp's neck, Sam attempted and failed to save his life. He is also visibly distraught upon learning that his younger brother Dickon was executed by Daenerys.
Big Fun: Albeit in a lower key kind of way.
Bolivian Army Cliffhanger: Season 2's finale ends with Sam surrounded by an army of wights led by the White Walkers.
Bookworm: Wanted to be a wizard, and freely admits he much prefers being a steward to being a ranger. "I read it in a book" is his fitting answer to many questions about his knowledge.
Butt-Monkey:
He is one to the other trainees and to Alliser Thorne, until Jon puts a stop to it.
Even his life in the Citadel is very unpleasant where he had to do a lot of chores particularly getting the bedpans, tossing its contents into the drainage and scrubbing it.
The Champion: To Gilly.
Cool Ancestral Weapon: When he leaves Horn Hill, he also takes House Tarly's Valyrian steel sword, Heartsbane.
Cowardly Lion: When he has to defend Gilly, he gets fierce. During the Battle for Castle Black, he's clearly scared shitless the entire time, but he stands his ground.
Crazy-Prepared: "Mhysa" reveals that he collected all the dragonglass daggers and arrowheads from the Fist of the First Men, because of their historical significance and because he thought they might prove useful. And boy, was he right!
Cultural Rebel: His family is martial and military, but Samwell is bookish and scholarly. He comes from the Reach and was raised in the Faith of the Seven, but upon joining the Night's Watch and befriending Jon Snow, he converts to the Old Gods (though whether he continues to practise it is not made clear). Likewise he falls in love with a Wildling girl despite being of the Night's Watch, and more Southern than the North.
Curb-Stomp Battle: Sam gets the crap beaten out of him by two Brothers in The Gift when he tries to protect Gilly from them. Thank god for Ghost.
Depleted Phlebotinum Shells: Owns a dragonglass dagger which he uses to slay a White Walker. And later steals the Tarly family heirloom longsword, Heartsbane, made of Valyrian Steel.
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: Accidentally oneshotting a White Walker counts as this.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: No one at Castle Black believes he killed a White Walker, thanks to the only witness being a Wildling.
Dudley Do-Right Stops to Help: Sam's reason for wanting to help Gilly, one of Craster's daughters. He points out to Jon that the Night's Watch is supposed to be protecting people and aiding those in need of help, which Gilly clearly is. 
Fat Best Friend: To Jon.
Fat Comic Relief: He gets a lot of humorous moments.
Fluffy Tamer: In "The Night Lands", Sam appears to be the only person besides Jon that Ghost will listen to.
Friendless Background: Until he met Jon.
Go Through Me: Takes this stance when a couple men try to rape Gilly.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Jon.
Hunting "Accident": What would have happened to him if he hadn't taken the black.
In-Series Nickname: "Sam the slayer." Used derogatively, it still works as a reminder of his unlikely but remarkable deeds.
Irony: The wayward son of a famously martial family, derided for being a weak, cowardly Bookworm, ends up being the first person in thousands of years to kill a White Walker.
Kirk Summation: Gives Maester Aemon a reminder of their cause when he's accused of forgetting his oath by choosing to help Gilly.
Sam: "Night gathers and my watch begins. I am the shield that protects the realms of men". The realms of men; that means her, as well as us! We didn't build five hundred miles of ice wall, seven hundred feet high to keep out men! The Night is gathering, Maester Aemon, I've seen it. It's coming for all of us!
Last of His Kind: With the deaths of his father and brother in "Eastwatch", he's the sole remaining male Tarly.
Loophole Abuse: Upon falling in love with Gilly, he takes a second look at the Night's Watch oath and notices it never actually specifically forbids them to have sex, as long as they don't get married or have children.
Lovable Coward: Scared of absolutely everything. Subverted completely in "The Watchers on the Wall" where he voluntarily joins in the defense and keeps a cool head before and during the battle.
Lyrical Dissonance: In a manner of speaking. While the nursery rhyme he sings about the Seven Gods to Gilly's baby is incredibly sweet, the dissonance comes when one considers the first verse describes the goodness of the Father to his children, compared to Gilly and Sam's relationship with their own respective fathers.
Manly Tears: He's visibly on the verge of tears upon learning that Daenerys executed his father and brother for refusing to bend the knee.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!:
His pep-talk to a terrified Olly inspires him to take up a bow and help fight...then he kills Jon's Love Interest. Ouch.
During "The Long Night", he decides to go to the front lines, leaving the women and children defenseless in the crypts from the wights the Night King raises, gets overwhelmed several times, and accidentally causes Edd's death because he stops to help Sam.
Nice Guy: Sam is very friendly and easy-going.
Non-Action Guy: He's a self-admitted coward. Subverted in "The Watchers on the Wall," where he keeps his cool in the battle and manages to get a headshot on a Thenn.
No Social Skills: Sam means nothing but well, but he seems to be pathalogically tonedeaf and prone to saying things that are obnoxious, dull or just plain ridiculous without realising it.
Number Two: Unofficially becomes this to Jon after the latter's election as Lord Commander. He becomes Jon's main confidant and, with Maester Aemon passing away and Thorne being Thorne, his only source of trusted advice. Jon outright states that he's reluctant to send Sam to become a Maester primarily because of this reason.
Out of Focus: In Season 6, where he only appears in three episodes and only has a major role in one of them.
Papa Wolf: When defending Gilly and her baby from a White Walker.
Parental Substitute: He's this to Gilly's baby to the point that in Season 6, Gilly flat out calls him the father of her son.
Persona Non Grata: Of his own house after his father finds out Gilly is a Wildling.
Plucky Comic Relief: Probably the best fit for this among any of the characters.
Precision F-Strike: Sam is a pretty polite speaker, which makes his telling Pip to "open the fucking gate" all the more shocking/hilarious.
Protectorate: Jon Snow seems to have adopted him as this within seconds of meeting. He defends Sam to anyone who tries to lay a finger on the new recruit, convinces all the other boys to leave him alone, and when one refuses to go along with it, sneaks into his room in the middle of the night and threatens him with his pet direwolf. Basically, hurting him is one of the quickest ways to piss Jon off.
And Gilly and her baby are his. He killed a White Walker to protect them!
Shrinking Violet: Which is why his father made him join the Night's Watch.
Shut Up, Hannibal!: Shames Janos Slynt when he makes a crude remark about Gilly by mentioning how he cowered in the pantry when everyone else fought bravely to defend Castle Black in Season 4.
The Smart Guy: Makes some astute observations in "The Pointy End" when bodies are brought back from the other side of the Wall.
Commander Mormont: You may be a coward, Tarly, but you're not stupid.
Suppressed Rage: He acts as formal and polite as ever when bidding farewell to Daenerys, even though his voice makes it clear how he feels about what happened to his family.
Took a Level in Badass: First, Sam is introduced as a completely hopeless fighter and a coward. By Season 3, he's able to lead Gilly and her baby all the way back to the Wall on his own, killing a White Walker along the way. Graduated to full on Badass as of "The Watchers on the Wall". While he recognizes his true talents are book intelligence and he is a terrible fighter, Sam still chooses to fight in the battle instead of hiding with Gilly, making himself useful by reloading crossbows for the other men who are also defending the Wall and encourages those who are afraid. He is also able to keep calm and collected during the fight, even when his friend Pypar dies, running through arrow-fire for reinforcements after Ser Alliser falls. Samwell even manages to kill a charging Thenn with a crossbow headshot. By Season 5, Sam commands enough respect from his fellow brothers to make a case to elect Jon as Lord-Commander of the Night's Watch.
Sam: I'm not nothing anymore.
Ultimately decides to join the front lines when the White Walkers assault Winterfell. Originally sitting out due to his lack of fighting prowess, he survives the battle despite at one point seen being overwhelmed by a swarm of Wights.
Tragic Dropout: He abandons the Citadel, disillusioned with the passivity of the Archmaesters about the upcoming war against the White Walkers. .
Surprisingly Realistic Outcome:
Sam killed a White Walker and a Thenn; impressive accomplishments, but ultimately the product of luck. His actual fighting ability is demonstrated in The Gift, where he gets the living shit beaten out of him by a couple of sworn brothers attempting to rape Gilly. He still retains his badass status, though, because even beaten to a pulp, he gets back up.
Also, when faced with his abusive father he quickly reverts back to a crying mess. Subverted in that he is ultimately able to defy his father by escaping with Gilly and stealing his precious sword.
Screw the Rules, I'm Doing What's Right!: He later reasserts this stance to Maester Aemon, correcting him in case he's having similar sentiments to Lord Mormont's ones about it not being their place to help others.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!: After Lord Commander Mormont is attacked by Rast, and all hell breaks loose, he runs to take Gilly away, forgetting about Edd and Grenn. In all fairness, they did the same thing to him when that horn sounded a third time...
True Companions: With Jon, Pyp, Edd and Grenn.
Undying Loyalty: To Jon. It's notable that despite being a self-admitted coward, he still chooses to go with Jon beyond the Wall in order to take his vows, despite the fact that he wasn't even raised to believe in the Old Gods. In Season 5, after Jon tells Sam of his intent to turn down Stannis's offer of legitimacy out of loyalty to his vows, Sam in turn nominates and successfully makes a case for Jon as Lord Commander of the Night's Watch, knowing that Jon is truly the best person for the job out of the three candidates.
In Season 7, he cements this in an understated moment of badass when, after all his attempts to get the Order of the Maesters to try and find a way to fight the Night King fail, he steals piles of books and scrolls and makes for Winterfell. This is pretty much guaranteed to have him thrown out of the order, when his dream is being a Maester. When he takes one last look at the tower library, you can see the heartbreak in his expression. Then he turns his back on everything he's ever wanted, saddles up, and rides off to the biggest war in history, because damnit, Jon needs him.
Unexplained Accent: Season 6 finally reveals Sam's ancestral home and immediate family, who all (particularly Dickon) speak with the moderate RP accent common to most of the aristocratic characters in the series (bar a few of the Northern houses). Sam's broad northern English accent therefore stands out as being slightly incongruent with his background.
Unexplained Recovery: He survives season 2's finale, luckily, but we are cheated out of a scene showing how in the process.
The Un-Favorite: He's at the Wall because his father threatened to murder him if he didn't "voluntarily" remove himself from the line of inheritance. Ouch.
You Shall Not Pass!: Invokes this towards the White Walker who tried to take Gilly's baby.