0% Approval Rating: He is already viewed with distrust and antipathy by his own people and family, the Ironborn, for having spent much of his life with the Northmen and having adopted their customs. When he seizes Winterfell, none of the Northerners are favourably inclined toward him. His subsequent actions pretty much results in every single Northerner, including the Starks, wanting to kill him. He is finally seen by them in a more favorable light after saving Sansa from the Boltons and helping Yara in her conflict against Euron.
2 + Torture = 5: After having broken him completely, Ramsay finally brutally beats him into accepting "Reek" as his new name. He eventually regains his identity after escaping from Ramsay, although he remains traumatized and has lapses.
A Friend in Need: With Sansa Stark. At the end of Season 5 and the outset of Season 6, he takes several extreme risks just to protect Sansa and help her escape from the Boltons.
Agony of the Feet: He has a very severe and noticeable limp, no doubt a permanent reminder of having a drill very slowly cranked through his left foot, and, of course, the castration.
Alas, Poor Villain: A lech, an oathbreaker, and a murderer of children, but damn if Ramsay Snow's torture doesn't make you pity Theon.
And Zoidberg: Bran prays for the safety of his brothers and friends "and Theon too, I suppose."
Annoying Younger Sibling: To Yara, who seems to find Theon's braggart tendencies as annoying as the Northerners do.
Arch-Enemy: As far as he's concerned, that fucking hornblower. That "fucking hornblower" turns out to be Ramsay Snow, who proves himself to be so very, very much nastier an archenemy than just an irritating musician.
Armor-Piercing Question:
On the receiving end of one from Bran: "Did you always hate us?"
He gives one to his father regarding him bending the knee to Robert: "Did you 'take what was yours' then?!"
Ascended Extra: In Season 1, he was mostly just Robb's sidekick who also served as some male Fanservice. From Season 2 onwards he's one of the show’s main characters.
Asshole Victim: Deconstructed. After what he did to the Starks and the innocent children he killed, he definitely deserved some sort of payback. But the torture he suffers at the hands of Ramsay is so excessive that it starts to actually make him sympathetic again.
The Atoner:
Sincerely regrets betraying the Starks and officially starts to try and make amends for what he did by saving Sansa's life and helping her escape from the Boltons.
Season 8 sees him volunteer to be Bran's guard as the latter acts as The Bait for the Night King. He tells Bran he wants to make up for taking Winterfell from him and forcing Bran and Rickon to go on the run.
As of The Last of the Starks, Theon's atonement is considered complete, as Sansa pins a dire wolf sigil on his body. Theon is put to rest as a Stark.
Attempted Rape: Saved by Ramsay Snow, of all people. Later becomes Ramsay's victim, who mind rapes, tortures, and castrates Theon.
Aw, Look! They Really Do Love Each Other:
Despite the bickering and vicious mocking, he and his sister Yara care about each other deeply. Yara even openly defies their father to set a rescue mission for Theon when they learn Theon is the Boltons' prisoner.
Despite his resentment over being a glorified hostage, he cares deeply for the Starks. So much that this affection is what allows him to finally break out of the "Reek" persona that Ramsay's tortures forced upon him.
Bad Boss: He soon starts resorting to brutal tactics to keep his crew in line, as per Dagmer's advice. To be fair, his employees are not any better.
Be All My Sins Remembered: Theon's decision to betray the Starks haunted him for much of the series. After helping her escape from the Boltons, Theon plans to take Sansa to the gates of Castle Black so she can be reunited with her brother Jon. She then suggests Theon join the Night's Watch so his crimes would be erased. Theon's not having it.
Sansa: We just have to make it to Castle Black. Once we're with Jon, Ramsay won't be able to touch us.
Theon: Jon would have me killed the moment I stepped through the gate.
Sansa: I won't let him. I'll tell him the truth about Bran and Rickon.
Theon: And the truth about the farm boys I killed in their place? And the truth about Sir Rodrick who I beheaded? And the truth about Robb who I betrayed?
Sansa: When you take the Black, all your crimes are forgiven.
Theon: I don't want to be forgiven. I can't even make amends to your family for the things I've done.
Beard of Sorrow: In Season 3 he sports a much longer beard. Justified, given that his captors haven't allowed him to shave.
Becoming the Mask: A very dark variation, not so much becoming as being viciously tortured until your mind snaps.
Being Evil Sucks: Finds out the hard way in Season 2, as he tries to live up to his family and people's standards, and acts increasingly ruthless as his desires to earn his family's respect and to rule Winterfell become more and morey desperate, but it only worsens his guilt and mental state and makes him even more miserable. From Season 3 onwards, after being tortured by Ramsay and becoming his slave, Theon deeply regrets his choices and wishes that he had stayed with and died with the Starks instead of betraying them.
Being Tortured Makes You Evil: Inverted. It's not until after his horrific torture at the hands of Ramsay that he becomes sympathetic again, and starts truly regretting his past actions.
Belated Love Epiphany: Of the familial type. He eventually comes to realize that the Starks were his true family, long after he betrays them and sets the events in motion that led to Robb and Catelyn's deaths.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: It's suggested that his feelings for Ros go a little beyond wanting her for her body. Nothing ever comes of this, though, considering Ros is killed by Joffrey and Theon...well, Theon's fate makes Ros look lucky.
Big Bad Wannabe: Theon manages to easily take over Winterfell but that's because every able-bodied man is out fighting with Robb Stark. It quickly becomes apparent that he's in over his head. Then he is arrested, tortured and enslaved by Ramsay, and this begins a journey of redemption.
Big Brother Instinct: Theon feels this towards all of the Starks.
He's quick to save Bran's life in Season 1.
When it seems like Robb and Greatjon may enter into a fight, Theon moves to defend him.
It's his affection for Sansa that allows him to get out of Ramsay's hold and escape.
Theon finishes his redemption by charging the Night King in a suicide attack to buy Bran a few more seconds of life.
Big Damn Heroes: In Season 1 he saves Bran from being held hostage by a wildling by shooting said wildling with his bow. Robb however isn't too thrilled by this because he nearly hit Bran in the process.
Black Sheep: To House Greyjoy, as despite his initial excitement to go back home and his desire to earn his family's respect, his own father view him as soft and weak and believe him to have become a "wolf" and treat him with open disdain, his own sister ridicules and humiliates him, and despite his efforts he cannot bring himself to enjoy their lifestyle of reaving nor to fully abandon the lessons Ned Stark taught him.
Blind Obedience: The torture at Ramsay's hands has worked well enough that he abandons and refuses to recognize his sister, willingly rats out Sansa's plans to him and generally does what he says. Ultimately averted when he sees Myranda threaten Sansa with a longbow. He snaps out, kills Myranda and escapes with Sansa out of Winterfell.
Blood Knight: Always smirking when there is the prospect of violence going on.
Bodyguard Betrayal: Sold to the enemy by his fellow Ironborn right after exhorting them to die fighting alongside him.
Brain Bleach: After realizing that the woman he was groping and tried to seduce was actually his sister.
Brainwashed and Crazy: To the point that he denies his very name and identity to his own sister. Mostly as a result of his conditioning from Ramsay's Tricked into Escaping gambit. It turns out that he remembers perfectly well who he is but it takes Sansa and his own guilt for him to reclaim himself.
Break the Haughty: It begins when he returns to the Iron Islands and finds that no one, not even his own family, has any respect for him and they openly mock him. In his efforts to earn their approval he ends up committing more and more morally questionable and reprehensible acts which cost him the few friends he has and turns him into a paranoid mess. He's eventually captured and tortured into insanity by Ramsey Snow.
Broken Pedestal: Spends most of his life believing that all Ironborn are Proud Warrior Race Guys who fights to the bitter end. He realized how wrong he was the hard way when his men sold him to the Boltons.
Butt-Monkey: Distrusted and treated like dirt by pretty much everyone except Robb.
This becomes even more pronounced in Season 2, where not only do his own people treat him with contempt, but he manages to make a fool of himself even after taking Winterfell. Remaining a Butt-Monkey while you're the leader of a conquering army is quite an achievement.
Nearly all of his scenes in Season 3 are him being tortured. By Season 4, he's utterly broken.
Calling the Old Man Out:
In "What is Dead May Never Die", after putting up with the constant abuse from his father, for the horrific "crime" of being the price Balon had to pay for losing his sorry little war a decade prior, he snaps with the quote below. He gets a smack across the face for his trouble. Sadly, he still decides to forsake the Starks and join the Greyjoy cause at the end of the episode. That said, it did seem to break through Balon's skull for a short time. That or it just made him think back to the deaths of his other two sons.
Theon: You act as if I volunteered to go! You gave me away, if you remember?! The day you bent the knee to Robert Baratheon! After he crushed you! Did you "take what was yours", then?!
It was possibly both, that Theon's words made Balon think about his dead sons, and for like a few seconds he understood the truth: that it was ultimately his own foolish pride and ambition that got his sons killed, not Robert Baratheon and Ned Stark. He lashed out at Theon rather than face the unpalatable truth.
Career-Ending Injury: It is heavily implied that the injuries he suffered from Ramsay's tortures ended his career as a warrior. His limp in particular permanently damaged his maneuverability. That said, he shows in Season 6 that he's still able to hold and use a sword and in Season 7 it's pretty much subverted completely when he actually fights impressively well against Euron's raiders and kills a decent number, but flees the battle when Euron sets off his PTSD.
The Casanova: Zigzagged, sometimes Theon is good at pulling women without having to pay, sometimes he's an outright Casanova Wannabe. The fact that most of the ladies he sleeps with are prostitutes or idiots who are easily swayed suggests he's the latter.
Character Development: The smug, arrogant, womanizing archer goes through a bout of truly horrific torture, leaving his mind fractured and his identity in shambles, before gradually reclaiming it piece by piece. He emerges still snarky, but with remorse for what he's done, a more noble streak, and a greatly humbled/self-deprecating attitude.
Character Tics: As a result of his indoctrination, Reek has great difficulty making eye contact; also, perhaps as a physical side-effect of all the torture, he's also prone to twitching during times of stress. Unfortunately, this still remains to some extent after he rediscovers himself as Theon Greyjoy.
Child of Two Worlds: A Deconstruction, he's too Northern for the Iron Islands and too Ironborn for the North. His failure to resolve that identity crisis leads to tragedy for him and everyone else. He eventually becomes Reek, a mindless puppet broken of will, neither Ironborn or Northern. He finally snaps out at the end of Season 5.
Co-Dragons: In Season 2 he becomes one to his father, Balon Greyjoy, alongside his sister Yara. It's played with though in that Balon clearly favors Yara far more than he does Theon.
Cold-Blooded Torture: After being sold out by the Ironborn, he's revealed in Season 3 to be a prisoner being subjected to it by his captors. Despite asking him questions, they don't actually seem to be interested in his answers.
Combat Pragmatist: He has shades of this. Though he's not really that pragmatic in other ways, from what we see, Theon actually has a fair measure of success in combat because he's sneaky and doesn't fight fairly.
In Season 1, he rescues Bran and ends the standoff between Robb and the wildlings by shooting their leader in the back.
In Season 2, he lures Ser Rodrik and the guards remaining in Winterfell away with a feint attack on Torrhen's Square. He then sends his men over the walls and takes the castle as it sleeps. He also successfully unleashes a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown on Black Lorren by exploiting the element of surprise.
Finally, in Season 5, he saves Sansa Stark from a world of hurt by chucking Myranda to her Disney Villain Death, a feat that he accomplishes by attacking from behind and subverting her expectations that he's totally Ramsay's creature (though that may not have factored in his decision to do it).
At the start of Season 6, he and Sansa are surrounded by Bolton soldiers and about to be dragged back to Winterfell, but suddenly Brienne and Podrick ambush the soldiers. During the ensuing fight, Pod is knocked off his horse and finds himself outmatched by the soldier he fights on foot. Before the soldier can deliver the killing blow, however, Theon gets his hands on a dropped sword and thrusts it into the back of Pod's attacker.
The Confidant: Everyone believes him to be a broken coward, so Roose and Ramsay Bolton have no issue with discussing sensitive information around him and use him to vent their problems and frustrations. This turns out to be a huge mistake when Theon finally decides to do the right thing at the end of Season 5.
Conflicting Loyalty: His biological family versus the one that raised him. He chooses his biological family, neatly summed up by his entry and image quotes, above, but ultimately regrets it as he realizes that Yara is the only one who actually cares for him. By the end of season 7, he has a talk with Jon and realizes that he doesn't have to choose one over the other, as shown when he rescues Yara from Euron then leaves her at the Iron islands so he can help the Starks fight the Night King.
Covered with Scars: Though Reek's face has been left mostly unmarked, during the bath scene it's revealed that the rest of his body is covered with dozens of painful-looking scars.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: In spite of all his other failings, Theon is an amazing archer and helped Robb win several of his initial battles. Everything went downhill for him after his Face–Heel Turn, and thanks to Ramsay Snow, he hasn't even got the archery anymore.
Though in Season 6 he is badass enough to try and lead the Bolton soldiers away from Sansa and later stab one in the back whilst Brienne and Pod were temporarily incapacitated. In Season 7, he fights and kill a few of Euron's raiders before he absorbs the horror of the scene and starts reliving his Ramsay induced trauma.
Season 8 solidifies his badass status, as he helps to defend Bran from the wights, and then after all of his men have fallen, he single-handedly uses a dragonglass polearm to down dozens of wights single-handedly, eventually engaging in a doomed charge against the Night King himself. He's easily defeated, but it took guts to go that far.
Crucified Hero Shot: He's introduced in Season 3 as bound to an X-shaped cross and being subjected to torture. He spends a lot of time this way.
Cultural Posturing: He's quite proud of his Ironborn heritage despite having spent his adolescent years away from the Iron Islands.
Culture Clash: He is the anthropomorphic personification of being neither one nor the other — and, all the good it doesn't do you.
Deadpan Snarker: He's often got some clever remark, even in dire situations.
Death Seeker: At the end of Season 3, Theon begs Ramsay to kill him, having lost all will to live after being castrated.
Defiant to the End: His last act is to charge at the Night King to buy Bran a few more seconds of life. Theon knew full well that he was going to die and decided to fight to the bitter end.
Despair Event Horizon: He's already past this during his torture by Ramsay and the news that Robb Stark is dead and Ramsay's own father murdered him probably killed any bits of hope he had left. He later dives even further when he meets Sansa and admits his guilt into betraying the Starks and outright admits he deserves to be tortured for killing children.
Desperately Craves Affection: He betrays Robb and the other Stark's to win the love and respect of his cunt father, (which doesn't happen) when ironically Robb was the one who really gave a shit about him. Theon eventually realizes what a mistake this was. Also, Yara is shown to care about him at the end of the day, meaning even within his own biological family, he was still looking for the approval of the wrong relative.
Disability Immunity: Probably the first time in TV history where a previous Groin Attack actually helped someone in a fight. When he gets in an argument with Harrag, the guy makes the mistake of trying to kick him in the balls, forgetting that there's nothing there. This allows Theon to tackle Harrag and beat the shit out of him.
The Dog Bites Back: Theon kills Myranda when she threatens to torture Sansa out of jealousy, He then grabs Sansa and jumps from Winterfell's walls with her, stealing Ramsay's prize.
Dude, Where's My Respect?:
He expects a grand welcome during his homecoming. He doesn't get it.
He also expects the people of Winterfell to at least show him a little respect, considering he invaded it with armed soldiers and occupied it. Noooooooope. Everyone from crippled children to helpless old men gives him lip and snark.
Dying Moment of Awesome: Theon and his men kill numerous wights, with Theon in particular being the last man standing and managing to kill many more wights even after running out of arrows. When the Night King arrives to kill Bran, one can see Theon's refusal to cave in to his fear, buying the precious few seconds needed with his life. He paid the Iron Price for his redemption.
Et Tu, Brute?: Robb once viewed Theon as one of his closest friends, so naturally he doesn't take Theon's betrayal well.
Eunuchs Are Evil: Averted. The horrific torture and mind-breaking he suffers alongside castration by Ramsay's hands gets some sympathy he lost when he went off the rails to please his father.
Everyone Has Standards:
Before his Face–Heel Turn, he appears disgusted that Jaime Lannister acts polite after having put several bannermen to the sword, suggesting they do the same.
Theon's tone when he and Robb's other supporters are discussing Walder Frey suggests he finds the man repulsive.
He's genuinely disgusted when he finds out that the woman he's been hitting on is his sister. Incest seems to be one of the few things he won't do.
He is horrified to see an innocent woman being killed by Ramsay's dogs.
He is clearly horrified to see Sansa being raped by Ramsay.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: When Yara mentions their deceased mother, it's clearly very painful for Theon to think about.
Evil Former Friend: He was a ward for the Starks, but Robb genuinely viewed him as a friend and Ned appears to have put effort into raising Theon as if he was one of his own children. The Starks are thus caught completely off guard when Theon betrays them by leading an Ironborn invasion of Winterfell.
Face Death with Dignity:
He attempts to do this at the finale of Season 2, planning to charge into battle against the Northern forces that have come for him and kill as many men as he can before he dies. Instead, his own men knock him out and sell him to the enemy. He then spends several years in hell...
In the finale of Season 3, his final desperate to cling to his name — and more than his name, his identity as a Greyjoy, a descendant of kings and warriors — in the face of Ramsay's increasingly brutal beatings has shades of this.
He finally accomplishes this in Season 8, bravely sacrificing his life to try to save Bran from the White Walkers.
Face–Heel Turn: Began the series as Robb's best friend, and then betrayed him when he was sent to the Iron Islands to treat with his father. He immensely regrets it.
Failed a Spot Check: He probably should have spent more time listening to Maester Luwin about the other Houses and their respective sigils since, despite being flayed on an X-shaped cross, he still doesn't figure out who's responsible for torturing him.
Fatal Flaw: Insecurity, along with envy. He's always wanted respect and admiration from the Starks, and is upset that he's viewed as a lackey to them, which is what leads him to eventually betray Robb. He gets most of this ruthlessly beaten out of him though.
Fate Worse than Death: Ramsay Bolton held Theon prisoner in the Dreadfort, torturing him into insanity and castrating him.
Fingore: During his first torture session, a thin blade is slowly forced under one of his fingernails. When Ramsay replaces the torturer and carries on the sessions by himself, his first "game" ends with Theon's pinky finger getting flayed; an experience so painful that Theon is left begging for Ramsay to amputate it altogether. Later, Theon is seen wearing a bandage over much of his right hand, implying that Ramsay has been doing the same for his other fingers.
Subsequent episodes show that Theon still has most of the fingers on his right hand at least. He was able to hold the razor with that hand when giving Ramsay a shave, and there's a closeup of a glove being put on his hand before he's sent to Moat Cailin. Most likely because he wouldn't be much use as a slave if he couldn't hold or carry anything.
Flaying Alive: Ramsay skinned parts of him, particularly his hands.
Foil:
Jon Snow. Both are raised under the House of Stark. Jon, as the illegitimate son of Lord Eddard Stark, wishes to be a legal Stark and Theon — though a trueborn son of House Greyjoy and a hostage/ward of the Starks — wants to be a Stark. Both suffer from "Well Done, Son" Guy. Both are Desperately Looking for a Purpose in Life. The difference is that Jon maintains his honor while Theon betrays his adopted family for his blood father who treats him poorly. Jon is loved by his father and half-siblings and grows up with his family while Theon grows up away from his family and has a father who doesn't even like him.
Ramsay Snow. They're both arrogant Big Bad Wannabe with weird senses of humor and violently unstable identity issues. Both enjoy hunting and wearing fine clothes. Both have lived far from their respective fathers for much of their lives. Because their fathers view them with nothing but contempt and disappointment, Theon and Ramsay attempt to win their love and respect with monstrous actions that only make matters worse. The difference is that Theon is a Butt-Monkey who is then reduced to a Cosmic Plaything, while Ramsay is a Karma Houdini for most of the series... at least until his final season in the show.
Jaime Lannister. Both come from prominent families, have a talent for weapons (sword for Jaime and bow and arrow for Theon), both were arrogant to hide their insecurities, both hurt children (Jaime pushing Bran off a window and Theon approving the killing of two miller boys), both were known as handsome, called turncloaks and both come from dysfunctional families with weird connections to their sisters. After horrible events, both suffer permanent disfigurements that hinder their handling of weapons (Jaime loses his sword hand, Theon loses some fingers and is castrated). Both try to redeem themselves and risk their lives for women (Brienne and Sansa) in some of the most selfless acts in the series. And in the end, they both fight together with House Stark in the final battle against the White Walkers.
Sansa Stark. Both are romantics with a tendency to fantasize only to have reality crush their dreams, and they even dreamed of marrying and becoming part of a different family. Both held hostage and abused by their captors (including sexually by Ramsay in both cases). Both change hands from one captor to another (Sansa- from the Lannisters to Petyr Baelish and then to Ramsay; Theon- from Starks to Boltons). Their resilience and ability to adapt keeps them alive.
Forced to Watch: Ramsay forced him to watch as he rapes Sansa on their wedding night.
Forgiven, but Not Forgotten: By Season 7, the surviving Starks have become sympathetic of him despite his betrayal in Season 2, especially as he saved Sansa from the Boltons. But they (Jon specifically) make it clear to Theon that his betrayal still stings.
A Friend in Need: He takes enormous risks in helping Sansa escape from the Boltons.
The Friend Nobody Likes: In the North, due to both being a Greyjoy and his smug personality. Bran and Jon both find him annoying, Catelyn doesn't trust him, and even his best friend Rob expresses annoyance at him sometimes.
General Failure: He only takes Winterfell because he was relying on the advice of the more experienced Dagmer, though it ends up being a Pyrrhic Victory once Osha escapes with Bran and Rickon, leaving Theon with no hostages he can return to the Iron Islands with. Despite this, he insists on holding Winterfell even though the Northern forces are closing in and greatly outnumber the skeleton crew he's using to hold the location with.
Glory Hound: He's desperate to make a name for himself somehow.
Going Native: A lot of his problems come from the fact that his mindset is far more Northern than Ironborn, but he refuses to admit it. This proves to be his undoing; he's willing to die rather than be "the Greyjoy who ran", not realizing that his Ironborn fighters think defiant last stands when running away with the loot is an option are just stupid.
Good Angel, Bad Angel: Maester Luwin and Dagmer are essentially this for him after he captures Winterfell. Dagmer usually wins out, which only serves to accelerate Theon's downfall.
Green-Eyed Monster: Appears to be quite jealous of Tyrion and the Lannisters due to their wealth and power.
Later, of Yara's favorite status with their father.
Theon also admits to Ramsay that he was jealous of Robb and never felt he could measure up to him.
Groin Attack: Ramsay castrates him with a gelding knife.
The Season 7 finale finally has him discover an upside to this, as he's now able to No-Sell any further strikes to the area.
Handicapped Badass: The handicapped part is Downplayed. Despite his torture, he is still able to hold his own with a sword in a fight. However, his experiences had definitely left their mark on him both physically and mentally.
Hates Being Touched: After his torture from Ramsay, Theon seems to have an aversion to touch. He's able to overcome this a little by the end.
He-Man Woman Hater: Slips into this after being forced to fight with Yara for his position as heir to Balon.
Heterosexual Life-Partners:
With Robb. Seems to hold him in regard out of any other Stark and he is usually the first to stand by any of Robb's decisions.
Theon: Am I your brother? Now and always?
Robb: Now and always.
Subverted by his betrayal in Season 2. After that, Robb wants to kill him.
Heel–Face Door-Slam: Late Season 2, Luwin attempts to reason with a desperate Theon that he is in over his head. Theon himself admits as much but then states that he's in too deep. He can't return home because he'd be returning a failure. Robb, the one person who actually respected Theon, would kill him on the spot. He's too scared to join the Night Watch and face Jon Snow after everything he's done.
Heel–Face Turn: In his finale of Season 5, he breaks free of Ramsay's psychological domination over him long enough to rescue Sansa Stark and escape from Winterfell. After that, Theon gets somewhat of a chance of redemption when he is welcomed back by his sister and the two align with Daenerys in Essos.
Heel Realisation: In Series 3, long after his antics have caused every member of his adopted family to despise him. In Season 5, he outright tells Sansa he deserves being tortured into Reek for killing those miller's boys and betraying Robb.
Theon: I deserved everything. I deserved to be Reek. I did terrible things. Turned on Robb. Captured Winterfell. Killed those boys.
The Hero Dies: The main protagonist of the Greyjoy storyline, he dies midway through the final season at the hands of the Night King.
Heroic Sacrifice: Is the last man left standing in the Godswood during the final battle at Winterfell, going down in one final charge to defend Bran from the Night King. While it comes off as a Senseless Sacrifice at first, his final charge buys precious seconds for Arya to deliver the killing blow before the Night King can kill her brother.
He's Back!: In the Season 5 finale, Theon begins to break free from his Reek persona, killing Myranda and saving Sansa while the Greyjoy theme plays. At the end of Season 6, the sight of the flag of the (dissident) Greyjoys as part of the Targaryen armada brings a smile to his face, signalling that he's well on the path to recovering from his ordeal. By the end of Season 7, it's safe to say Reek has been put to rest, as Theon demonstrates with his determination to rescue his sister and his No-Holds-Barred Beatdown of the Ironborn captain, complete with one of his trademark smirks. “Winterfell”, the opening episode of Season 8, sees the return of Theon the archer.
Hoist by His Own Petard: A heroic version. He was killed by the Night King using his own spear.
Hope Spot: Too bad for Theon, the guy supposedly sent by his sister to save him turns out to actually be the very bastard who imprisoned him, playing a mind game on him to break his spirit.
Humiliation Conga When he gets back to the Iron Islands he is disrespected and humiliated. The conga only ends when the Trauma Conga Line begins in the Dreadfort.
I Have Your Wife: Theon was raised by Ned Stark as insurance for Balon Greyjoy's good behavior.
I Am X, Son of Y: Theon throws his dad's name around quite a few times to boast about his status. Most people have no idea who he's talking about.
I Cannot Self-Terminate: He begs Ramsay to kill him in 'Mhysa.' Ramsay doesn't oblige, partly because his father still needs Theon as a bargaining chip, but mostly because he's having too much fun in making Theon's life a living hell.
I Just Want to Be Special: A reoccurring theme in Theon's early character arc. Despite being raised by the Starks, he was never truly considered one of them. When returning to his homeland, Theon was hit with the cold hard reality that he was not missed. He overthrows Winterfell in a gambit to win his father's affection but ends putting himself in an unwinnable situation when the rest of the North wants him dead. This all ultimately leads to his his capture by Ramsay.
Identity Breakdown: The torture he experiences at the hands of Ramsay Bolton and the forcing of the Reek identity on to him causes Theon to have a very reasonable mental break in which he actively disidentifies with his identity as Theon Greyjoy. Escaping the Ramsey's, his character development is about him redisovering who Theon is and the person he wants to become.
Ignored Expert: Despite being the only Ironborn who knows the North, and his precious knowledge of northern castles such as Deepwood Motte and Winterfell, he's totally ignored by his father and the rest of the Ironborn when planning their invasion much to his frustration.
The Igor: As Reek, to Ramsay, complete with slow gait and low-bent head. Going with the Ramsay = Dracula parallelism, Reek is also The Renfield, or a deconstruction of this trope.
Impaled with Extreme Prejudice: After running out of arrows in the battle at Winterfell in Season 8, he picks up a spear and starts cutting down any wight he can find. He finally charges at the Night King with the spear, but the Night King sidesteps, breaks the spear, and impales Theon with one of the broken pieces.
Ineffectual Sympathetic Villain: Starts out as this in Season 2. He acts out on his anger at his father for sending him off, and his disdain for the Starks for running his chance at becoming a ruler when he was made to be a squire for them, by forcibly taking control of their castle. Becomes a Butt-Monkey quickly after his takeover, as Bran (a crippled eleven year old boy) flat-out tells him that he rejects his bid for power and acts bored when he makes his demands, gets told off by the people and servants in Winterfell, and even spit on by one of them. Theon quickly becomes a Villain Protagonist after the last incident, brutally hacking the head off the person who spit on him and having two children killed then burning their bodies just to make Winterfell believe the Stark children were dead. Theon's received a horrific dose of Laser-Guided Karma by Ramsay Snow later, and even Sansa realizes he's far too pathetic and miserable to truly hate.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: Theon's arrogance has a whole lot to do with the fact that he grew up as a Stark ward/glorified Stark prisoner and was constantly reminded of how he should feel grateful to his adoptive family/captors.
Ignored Epiphany:
Theon acknowledges the truth of Maester Luwin telling him that he's not the evil man he's been acting as, and can make amends for his treachery by joining the Night's Watch. However, Theon feels that he has already gone too far.
Earlier, Tyrion calls Theon out on how he's joined House Stark in all but name. He quickly moves on, but had he listened, he'd have either put more thought into his visit with his father or rejected the Greyjoys outright. Instead, he just assumed everything would be fine, to the detriment of all.
Insistent Terminology: Insists on being referred to as "Lord Greyjoy" on account of his heritage. When he takes Winterfell, he takes the title 'Prince of Winterfell,' and insists that people refer to him as "Prince Theon." This, like so many, many other examples of his faults is used to horrifying effect by Ramsay Snow whom after torturing and mutilating him to near insanity, playing sick mind games to break him down to a sobbing wreck whenever he sees him and personally castrating him, decides that "Theon" is too much a "lord's name" for him — there was even a King in the North called Theon Stark — as he is nothing but "stinking meat" now and thus his name should reflect that.
Ironic Hell: His attempt to resolve his identity crisis (Northman/Stark or Iron Islander/Greyjoy) in the first couple of seasons, results in his capture and torture by Ramsay Bolton, where he struggles between his born identity as Theon Greyjoy of the Iron Islands, and the 'Reek' identity Ramsay Bolton forced upon him. He eventually becomes Theon Greyjoy again, but still not the same guy he'd had in mind — rather, he's a mentally and physically mutilated version of Theon Greyjoy that still can't shake some of Reek's mannerisms.
"It" Is Dehumanizing: After Ramsay demonstrates just how harmless Theon is now, Locke refers to him as "your pet rat", and Roose Bolton calls him "your creature".
It's All About Me: He doesn't take much consideration for anything but his own immediate gratification and how other people view him. Even as Reek, he's mainly concerned about preventing Ramsay from torturing him more than usual and knowingly finks Sansa's rescue plans and gets her friend killed, even saying that he's doing this to stop Ramsay from hurting her. Sansa however gives him a "The Reason You Suck" Speech instead which starts his Heel Realization. The first outright selfless action he's ever done, either as Theon or Reek, is when he kills Myranda and stops her from torturing Sansa and chooses to escape with her over the walls of the castle. In the sixth season, however, this appears to have changed; when he and Sansa hear the Bolton men approaching, Theon tells her to hide while he goes to lure them away, and then to head for Castle Black where she'll be safe with her brother Jon Snow. When they corner Theon and demand to know where Sansa is, he lies and tells them that Sansa broke both legs in the fall and he left her behind to die. Unfortunately, they don't believe him and their dogs easily pick up Sansa's scent. But he tried, knowing that he was facing capture and even worse torture at Ramsay's hands.
It's Personal with the Dragon: While Theon was coaxed into invading the North by his father, Robb has a much more personal grudge against him since he viewed Theon as a friend prior to his betrayal. When sending terms to the Ironborn stationed in Winterfell, he makes a point to exclude Theon from his offer of leniency.
Jerkass: Theon is a bit of a cocky, brash and impulsive Narcissist, even before his Face–Heel Turn. Significantly less of one following his Heel–Face Turn.
Jerkass Has a Point:
While his betrayal of the Stark is bad he does say to Luwin how terrible it was to have people calling him lucky to have such admirable jailers.
Balon and Yara refuse to listen to his warnings about the North not being so easy to conquer. They are convinced he is only trying to dissuade from the attack them due to his loyalty to the Starks. This is actually true but Theon turns out to be correct about the North being well defended. In the end the Ironborn are only able to take three castles. They later surrender two of these without a fight when a Northern army actually arrives to take them back.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Despite being a narcissistic asshole at first, he is also a good person at times. He saved Bran's life, gave Robb some good advice, told Jon that he gets to keep Ghost, and even tried to make conversation with Tyrion Lannister. Even when he betrays the Starks he still tries at first to be kind and gentle with Bran.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: When he publicly executes two peasant children in order to pass them off as Bran and Rickon, he has all but permanently burned his bridges with the Starks and Winterfell.
Karmic Overkill: Straight example when he is held captive and tortured by the Boltons. Compared to Robb's desire to behead Theon himself for invading Winterfell and murdering his little brothers (they escaped but Robb never knew), Ramsay's torture of him is so over-the-top and cruel that eventually it actually makes the viewer start to sympathize with Theon again.
Kick the Dog: He has behaved abusively toward Ros and Osha and other characters don't seem to trust or like him. In Season 2, his capture of Winterfell and subsequent actions are basically one long exercise in this trope. Notably his killing of Ser Rodrik and two innocent peasant boys.
Kinslaying Is a Special Kind of Evil: After supposedly killing Bran and Rickon, he is denounced by some characters as a kinslayer, although they weren't related by blood, since he was their father's ward and thus they were effectively foster brothers.
The Lancer: To Robb in Season 1 and the first part of Season 2, being his closest friend and confidante.
Last Stand: Theon is the last person standing between the Night King and Bran, and opts for a suicide charge.
Loser Son of Loser Dad: He's seen this way in-universe. The Greyjoys have become the punchline to a joke in Westeros after Balon's failed rebellion.
Jaime: I saw the youngest Greyjoy boy at Winterfell. It was like seeing a shark on a mountaintop.
Jory: Theon. He's a good lad.
Jaime: I doubt it.
Loss of Identity: His time under Ramsay where he's forced to take on the Reek personality and name nearly does this to him. He completely follows Ramsay's slightest whim and command, ratting out anyone who tries to appeal or meet him, and even Ramsay is convinced that Reek is entirely his. Turns out he's not. Theon still remembers and feels guilty about killing those miller's boys and betraying Robb and finally rescues Sansa and kills Myranda when the latter points out that Sansa will likely meet the same Fate Worse than Death him, though it is very possibly Myranda was saying this out of pure jealous of Sansa cause of Ramsay's attraction to her.
Male Frontal Nudity: Theon's bare chest gets a shot in "The Wolf and the Lion".
Madness Mantra: When it appears his mission to trick the Ironborn is failing, Reek begins to mutter to himself quietly "Reek, Reek, it rhymes with weak".
Meaningful Name: He's named Theon, just like King Theon Stark, a Worthy Opponent of the Ironborns. This foreshadows the tragedy of his life: being torn apart by his Ironborn origin and his northern upbringing.
Meaningful Rename: Ramsay renames him "Reek" in "Mhysa", mostly because he stinks.
Mind Rape: Ramsay's physical and mental torture warps his personality into something called "Reeks".
Mirror Character: To Tyrion Lannister. Both are desperately trying to earn the love or, at the very least, the respect of their respective fathers, who believe that they are a disappointment and a dishonor for their family name. Both commit morally wrong or even monstrous acts to achieve their goals: Tyrion basically does everything to save the reign of the cruel and sadistic Joffrey, who has demonstrated many times that he is unworthy of the throne, while Theon takes Winterfell, betrays the Starks, who was his family for a decade, and kill innocent people, including children. Their arc in Season 2 ends with them failing miserably in their attempts: Theon is betrayed by his own men and becomes a hostage to Ramsay Snow, while Tyrion, despite keeping King's Landing standing long enough for Tywin and the Tyrells to save the day, is disfigured in battle, almost dies and receives no honor or reward for his deeds. And, of course, both continue to be hated by their respective parents.
Misplaced Accent: Despite being from the Iron Islands, Theon sounds Northern, likely due to his time with the Stark family.
It's particularly noticeable in Season 2 where the Ironborn characters sound vastly different than Theon does.
Yara also pronounces his name as "Tee-on", not "They-on". This implies that even he has forgotten how to say his own name.
Hilariously, when one looks at the background, one finds that the name Theon is in fact a given name in the North. With one of the Kings of Winter (Theon Stark the Hungry Wolf, mentioned in chapter 69 and 66 of GoT and ACCK respectively), so it may not be forgetting as much as it is he just doesn't care which he says it. This is fitting, considering the Ironborn and the Northmen have the same basic cultural origin, with both being the last descendants of the First Men.
Moral Event Horizon: The taking of Winterfell and execution of Ser Rodrik are treated this way in-universe. The execution of the two orphans to pass them as Bran and Rickon also counts in and out of the series, with Theon himself remaining stricken with guilt and regret over these murders in Season 3. In Season 5, he admits that being tortured into Reek is punishment for those crimes.
My God, What Have I Done?:
It's subtle, but when Theon kills Ser Rodrik, he's shown standing and staring in the rain, and you can see this etched on his face. Later, when he hoists the corpses of two children he claims were Bran and Rickon, he immediately looks down in regret and guilt.
In Season 3, Theon begins to voice his regrets over betraying the Starks after he realizes Balon Greyjoy will never truly love him as a son like Ned Stark did. Important to note is that all of these revelations come while he is free from captivity and under the impression that he is about to be reunited with his sister.
Theon: My real father lost his head at King's Landing.
Named After Somebody Famous: Like many Ironborn, Theon is probably named after their greatest Worthy Opponent, King Theon Stark.
Nice Guy: After escaping Ramsay he becomes way more agreeable and easy to get on with, having permanently shed the Smug Snake attitude.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: Unleashes a surprising one on Lorren, beating him to the ground after he tries to deflect blame for letting Bran and Rickon escape.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed:
While not related by blood to the main Stark brood, his being raised amongst them (and treated as a brother) yet eventually betraying them in the chaos of war very closely brings to mind George, Duke of Clarence—with Robb being the stand-in of English King Edward IV.. George's betrayal was never really forgiven by Edward (even eventually having him executed)—much like Robb initially wanted to do for Theon's betrayal. That said, Theon did get his shot at atonement and redemption in contrast.
Theon's complicity in the alleged murder of Bran and Rickon Stark (where he had two shepherd boys killed and claimed them as the young Starks), leading to his disfigurement, is also essentially a caricature of the person most identified with the mystery of The Fate of the Princes in the Tower: Richard III, the other brother of King Edward IV.
No-Sell: His castration means that a Groin Attack is now useless against him in a fight, as we discover at the end of Season 7 when one of his men tries it on him repeatedly. Theon just smiles and proceeds to win the fight.
Not Afraid to Die: While he's not suicidal, he doesn't fear death as it means would mean an end to his pain and suffering.
The Oath-Breaker: He broke his oath to fight by Robb's side until his dying day.
Only Sane Man: Before the Greyjoys entered the war he proposed an alliance with the North and tells Balon that they're doomed to fail if they don't. Yara later agrees with him.
Organ Dodge: The organs in question being his genitals. As mentioned above under Disability Immunity, his castration during a period of Cold-Blooded Torture enables him to shrug off another Groin Attack in a later season.
Out of Focus: In Season 4, Theon appears in only three of the ten episodes.
Overlord Jr.: Is Balon Greyjoy's only surviving son and thus his heir. After returning to the Iron Islands, Balon is quick to pressure him back into service.
Pet the Dog:
Despite his faults, he seems to be a loyal friend to Robb and one of his most ready supporters, until he betrays him.
He still makes the effort to gently persuade Bran to hand over the castle, and promises to treat the people as well as their previous lord did, in clear attempt to justify his own actions. He doesn't take it well when they don't show him an inkling of respect in spite of this.
When Ser Rodrik gives him a "Reason You Suck" Speech, Theon's more forgiving than many other villains in the series; his first response is to basically tell Ser Rodrik that he should be quiet, or else. That's when Ser Rodrik spits in his face with everybody watching. Theon's response to that is to order Ser Rodrik imprisoned, but before he finishes the sentence he is interrupted by Dagmer, who tells him that if Theon does anything less than execute Ser Rodrik after an insult like that, nobody will respect him. The whole reason Theon took Winterfell in the first place was because he wanted his men to start respecting him, so this finally convinces him to do it. Even so, he still has a My God, What Have I Done? reaction as described above, and if Dagmer hadn't poked that particular sore spot then Ser Rodrik would have been spared.
Even though it would have been more pragmatic to pull a He Knows Too Much on the farmer Theon instead choses to just pay him off for his silence. Unfortunately Dagmer had other ideas.
The Pig-Pen: As Reek, Theon was forced to live in the kennels amidst the dogs' filth and then forbidden to wash off.
Politically Incorrect Villain: He openly considers women inferior to men and detests the Wildlings despite them being no worse than Theon's own people.
Prophetic Name: In-universe, he was named after a Stark king respected by the Greyjoys, Theon Stark, long before he was ever sent to live with the Starks.
Proud Warrior Race Guy:
He's trying his damnedest to be this.
Theon: You're not a man in the Iron Islands 'till you've killed your first enemy!
Theon assumes that his men, being proud Ironborn warriors, would willingly brave certain death to go out in a blaze of brutal glory. Noooooooooope.
Raised by Natives: The first 10 years with the Greyjoys and the later 9 with the Starks. The result? He is too much of a Stark to be a Greyjoy, and too much of a Greyjoy to be a Stark. In the end, he comes to the realization that he wanted a family.
Raised by Rival: He was a child of ten when he became a ward of House Stark, held as a hostage to deter a second rebellion by his father, Balon.
Really Gets Around: Mostly with women he pays or complete idiots who are easily taken advantage of. He also fancies himself a ladykiller and The Casanova, but his onscreen relationship pursuits have so far consisted of: visiting Ros (a prostitute), attempting to force himself on Osha (who just tells him off before they're interrupted and later seduces him in a Batman Gambit Honey Trap way), seducing the captain's teenage daughter on a ship, and (unknowingly) groping his sister.
This reputation came back to haunt him in the worst possible way when Ramsay Snow heard of it and was thus inspired to violently castrate Theon in order to utterly break him.
Redemption Equals Death: Theon dies fighting for the family and place he knew most of his life and once betrayed.
The Resenter: On so many levels. More or less justified, too.
Rousing Speech: Actually, Theon's surprisingly good at these. Though rare, whenever he gives one, most who listen tend to sway to his side. Even those plotting against him like Dagmer (by his own admission) found his speeches quite enthralling. Interestingly, whenever this happens, something much worse comes along to undo it!
A pretty nice one in "Valar Morghulis". Shame he gets knocked out right after by Dagmer. Well, at least he let him finish.
Dagmer: It was a good speech, didn't want to interrupt.
He gets another fantastic one in in "The Door" while vouching for Yara at the Kingsmoot. Then Euron comes along...
Sacrificial Lion: He is the final character killed by the Night King before the undead ruler's own demise at Arya's dagger.
Sanity Slippage: His mental health has clearly deteriorated during Season 2. Not surprising, given his father's treatment, his less-than-stellar attempts at earning his men's respect, the Northerners' hatred when he takes Winterfell and losing Bran and Rickon. Another major reason for this, is that his behavior at Winterfell was really inconsistent with his personality, as his hesitation and ambivalence demonstrates. Theon might have been a egotistical, womanizing Butt-Monkey who could never get any respect, but that was mostly due to insecurity. He wasn't genuinely evil.
His torture at the hands of Ramsay Snow has seen him turn into a wreck of a person, completely consumed by fear of Ramsay. He finally gets over that fear by helping Sansa escape. But Euron triggers his fears again, causing Theon to abandon Yara.
Screw This, I'm Out of Here!: After Euron wins the Kingsmoot, he and Yara go into exile rather than stay at the mercy of their murderous uncle, and a sizeable portion of dissident Ironborn follow them in taking the best Ironborn ships with them.
Sibling Rivalry: With his sister Yara, for the respect of his father.
Also with Ned Stark's illegitimate son, Jon Snow, as they are both raised under the same roof and share a close relationships with Robb. Theon considers himself the better one for being a trueborn son of House Greyjoy.
Slave to PR: Increasingly becomes this over the course of Season 2 with his attempts to affirm his Ironborn heritage. Yara eventually calls him out on it.
Small Name, Big Ego: Thinks he's pretty damn awesome in battle and lovemaking among other things, but no one else is buying it. This is perhaps best demonstrated when he can't even take off Ser Rodrik's head until after several strokes, and in the end is simply hacking away and actually has to kick the head off in the end. When Ned did the same thing in the first episode he actually used a proper heavy sword (so heavy, in fact, that Ned hardly swung it, just let it fall), demonstrating that Theon literally doesn't have the right tools for the job and is too smug and arrogant to ask for them.
Smug Smiler: He constantly gives arrogant smiles, even at inappropriate times. He stops this quickly after being tortured by Ramsay.
Smug Snake: Theon is accused of this by so many people (Tyrion, Ros, Osha, Maester Luwin, Balon, Yara) because of his hostage status that his Inferiority Superiority Complex and his desire to prove himself lead him to terrible decisions, thereby proving them right. Only being tortured by Ramsay broke the vicious cycle.
Spanner in the Works: He somehow manages to be this for three different factions:
To Robb Stark. His father wants to take over Moat Cailin, Deepwood Moote and villages on the coast, believing that Winterfell could wait a year or two. Theon however takes the seat of the Starks by subterfuge, an action which deals a critical blow to Robb's campaign and costs him the loyalty of the Boltons.
Likewise to Balon and Yara Greyjoy, his breakdown under torture ends up making him a Bolton puppet which makes her effort to rescue her brother a doomed effort that costs the lives of several good Ironborn fighters. Later, he becomes a go-between that negotiates the surrender of Moat Cailin, starting the beginning of the end of the Ironborn campaign in the north.
To the Boltons, the fact that he did not kill Bran and Rickon Stark but two farmer's children instead, means that the Princes could turn up later under the guidance of some other Northern Lord or the other and upset their hegemony in its nascent stage. Later Ramsay's insistent on keeping Theon as Reek leads to Sansa deprogramming him to the extent that he snaps and kills Myranda and escapes with her when Ramsay fights Stannis.
He later throws a spanner into his uncle Euron's plans when he and Yara take the Iron Fleet's best longships with them into exile, forcing Euron to build a new fleet from scratch and delaying his plans to ally with Dany and conquer the Seven Kingdoms.
In the end, Theon starts the chain of events that finally culminates in the Boltons' downfall during Season 6.
Stepford Smiler: Inside, Theon was never as self-assured as he made out, which is why he shoved that Smug Smile on and went overboard in the "superior to you" attitude when around others.
Stone Wall: Castration might have taken out his cockiness and made him easy to beat to a pulp, but Theon can just wait until his opponent gets tired (especially if he wastes time to his them in the groin, where there's nothing) and beat him up. During the fight with the nasty Captain, all Theon had to do was wait for the guy to run out of stamina and then start whaling on him.
Stupid Evil: Displays poor leadership and favours unnecesary violence. He's shortsighted and doesn't seem to grasp the concept of Pragmatic Villainy, being more interested in seeming tough. Luwin is unable to convince him that Ser Rodrick is more valuable alive than dead, and Theon repeats this mistake again with the Stark boys, as Yara points out. A rare example in which his Stupid Evil comes from trying to adhere to PR where the Ironborn are concerned.
Suicide by Cop: His attitude at the end of Season 2 screams that. Theon knows that he has no chance of holding Winterfell with just a few dozen men and that he has to flee before the army led by Ramsay Snow arrives. Instead of doing this, he decides to stay and states that dying in battle is the best option for him at this point. Even in this he fails miserably.
Supporting Protagonist: He is the central Greyjoy character of the series, but Balon and Yara has the clear authority in their group.
Taking You with Me: Theon appears to attempt this during his suicidal charge at the Night King, but he fails and is stabbed to death with his own broken spear.
That Man Is Dead:
He insists he has always been "Reek", making it clear that any trace of the man he once was is gone.
Reek: Theon Greyjoy tried to escape. The master knew. He knows everything. He hunted him and caught him and strapped him to a cross and cut away piece after piece until there was no Theon left.
The Season 5 finale resurrects Theon again.
They Really Do Love Each Other: Theon with Yara and the Starks. Despite everything that has happened to him, Yara cares for Theon enough to try to save him from Ramsay, and Theon returns the favor by saving her from Euron. With the Starks, Theon decides to fight at Winterfell and sacrifice his life for them, considering them his family. Despite his betrayal, the Starks forgive him.
Thicker Than Water: The reason for his Face–Heel Turn.
Thousand-Yard Stare: His default expression nowadays. Comprehensibly if you're forced to spend your days alongside and at the mercy of Ramsay Bolton, your face eventually gets permanently stuck in an empty, horrified look.
Throwing Your Gun at the Enemy: In "The Long Night", Theon throws his bow at a wight after running out of arrows, which helps him buy enough time to grab hold of a nearby spear.
Tragic Villain: Despite his rather unpleasant personality, he becomes one of these due to the degree to which his jerkassery and later villainy is fueled by never being accepted by anyone, as well as his upbringing. His nightmarish fate in Season 3 makes this all the more pronounced.
Throw the Dog a Bone: After at least three years of bad fortune, torture, and abuse, Season 6 sees Theon reestablish his identity as a Greyjoy, finally bond and mend fences with Yara, and find a proud place in Daenerys Targaryen's armada, firmly setting him on a road to recovery.
Too Dumb to Live: The taking of Winterfell was tactically brilliant, but a strategic failure. If only he'd burned Winterfell upon seizing it and carried off the Stark boys to Pyke as hostages, everything would have turned out all right. Theon would have earned the respect of all the Ironborn, gained two valuable hostages from the Starks, and proved to his father that his loyalties were to the Ironborn, not the Starks. Theon however wants to be a ruler now, not upon his father's death (ironically that's closer than he thinks). It's implied that he doesn't do this because he wants to be both a Stark and a Greyjoy. By taking Winterfell he proved that he was a Greyjoy. By ruling Winterfell, he'd prove that he was a Stark. His inability to firmly pick a side led to his downfall and the end he was left nothing, but Reek.
Took a Level in Jerkass: When he invades the North to conform to Ironborn standards. Sure, he wasn't sweet innocence and light before this, but he attained a new level of jerk-/jackass at this point.
Trauma Conga Line: Everything that happened to him while Ramsay Bolton's prisoner.
Turncoat: Theon is named a turn cloak by the North for attacking the Starks.
Undying Loyalty:
To Ramsay for most of Seasons 4 and 5, averted finally when he kills Myranda and runs away with Sansa.
To Yara after Season 6 finale, being her right-hand man.
The Un-Favorite: His father clearly does not think of him highly, instead preferring Yara.
The Unfought: For Robb, who is clearly itching to give Theon some payback after he learns of his betrayal. Thanks to Theon being captured by the Boltons and Robb dying before he can return North, Robb never gets a chance to confront Theon over his treachery.
Ungrateful Bastard: How the Northerners view him after his siege of Winterfell. Ned Stark raised him like a ward instead of a hostage, Robb considered him his best friend and Theon repaid them by taking Winterfell and killing "Bran and Rickon." Theon believed otherwise, remarking that everyone at Winterfell was cold and distant towards him growing up and claims that this means he has no reason to be loyal to House Stark. Theon views himself as this after Ramsay's torture, realizing that Robb was more his brother than any of Balon's other sons and that he should have fought and died alongside him.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: His betrayal indirectly caused the most damage to House Stark than he or anyone else could have imagined. Robb was devastated by the situation and this made him accept Roose Bolton's advice to send Ramsay with an army to capture Theon. Instead, Ramsay destroyed Winterfell and killed all of the resident Northerners, further weakening Robb and making him increasingly dependent on Roose and Walder Frey, who betrayed him at the Red Wedding.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: He was shy as a child and a true brother to Robb.
Villain Protagonist: Becomes one in Season 2, acting as the focal character for the Greyjoy invasion of the North.
Warrior Prince: After leading the Ironborn occupation of Winterfell, he insists on everyone referring to him as Prince Theon, likely because the Iron Islands have now declared their independence from the Seven Kingdoms.
Was Once a Man: Played with. In his transformation into Reek, Theon was disfigured and is regarded by all as wholly less than human. Ramsay in particular is especially insistent that Reek is not a man, but rather a creature. It's clear that Theon also feels this way about himself.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: A big part of his personality and issues stem from this. It isn't until "The Ghost of Harrenhal" that he realizes just how little respect people really have for him due to this, as the Ironmen don't respect those who just blindly do as they're told. When he disregards Balon's orders to raid small fishing villages and chooses to hit a larger, harder target with more plunder, the men begin to respect him more. And then his sister shows up and continues to berate him (though, in that case, it's a little justified, since it's about killing fake Bran and Rickon). In Season 3, he finally admits that his true father was Ned.
We Used to Be Friends: He was treated with familiarity by the Starks and was a close friend of Robb's.
Would Hit a Girl: Would throw one over a balcony to her death, anyway. Rest in pieces, Myranda!
Would Hurt a Child: The two orphan boys he had murdered and burned to take the place of Bran and Rickon. Theon doesn't quite have it in him to do it himself, however, letting Dagmer do so. However he fully accepts responsibility and later admits to Sansa that he deserves being tortured by Ramsay for what he had done.
You Are Better Than You Think You Are: Right before Theon's Heroic Sacrifice, Bran thanks him for all that he's done, and tells him he's a good man.
You Can Barely Stand: In "The Long Night", Theon is the last man standing at the Godswood and he's so fatigued that he almost collapses slumped forward.
You Can't Go Home Again: Theon's lifelong problem since he was taken hostage by the Starks after his father's first rebellion. He's never truly home at Winterfell and he becomes a Stranger in a Familiar Land in both the Iron Islands (as the returning Prodigal Son) and in Winterfell (as the traitorous former ward). In Season 5, he decisively breaks from Ramsay by killing Myranda, knowing there's no way he can ever return to him now, and so he and Sansa run for it. In Season 6, his uncle Euron murders his father and is appointed the new King of the Iron Islands, so now even there is no longer safe for Theon.