Action Girl: For the Wildlings. She's their most capable archer.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: Averted. She rejects Orell for Jon (it implied that this is not the first time Ygritte has done this).
Armor-Piercing Question: When Jon angrily declares that he and his family are of the First Men and therefore, have same blood as the Wildlings and have as much claim to the North as they do, she responds with a simple, "Then why are you fightin' us?" Jon is quite surprised by this.
Because You Were Nice to Me: She starts to become attracted to Jon because he spares her life.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Jon Snow.
Brief Accent Imitation: Loves to mock Jon by repeating his sentences in a guttural tone modeled after Snow's one.
Brutal Honesty: When the Halfhand asks her what the Wildlings would do if they captured him, Ygritte informs him he would count himself very fortunate if his death was quick.
Catchphrase: "You know nothing, Jon Snow." Becomes a Subverted Catchphrase when Jon shows her how to do it down south.
Cold Sniper: Already a deadly archer, "Breaker of Chains" demonstrates that Ygritte has no problem with shooting unarmed peasants, remaining unerringly cold and focused throughout the slaughter.
Country Mouse: Having never seen a windmill before, she is completely amazed by it and assumes it is a castle. Jon corrects her that castles are about three times as large.
Culture Clash: With Jon. Despite the two of them having basically the same cultural origin as descendants of the First Men. She regularly mocks — or punctures through — the southern customs and conventions he's used to and that he grew up with.
Dark Action Girl: In the view of the Night's Watch.
Dating Catwoman: She's Jon Snow's Catwoman.
Deadpan Snarker: Extremely so. Every other line out of her mouth is a snappy retort.
Ygritte: How old are you, boy?
Jon: I'm a man. Of the Night's Watch.
Ygritte: You're a boy who's never been with a girl before?
Died in Your Arms Tonight: Held by a devastated Jon as she dies in his arms when she is shot during battle.
Dramatic Irony: Her catchphrase is originally a reference to Jon's Night's Watch vows and eventually expands to his naiveté about certain Wildling customs, but it is oddly prescient in retrospect once the audience learns of Snow's true parentage and birthright.
Due to the Dead: Is given a personal funeral by Jon Snow alone in the forest beyond the Wall, with her body then ceremonially burned.
Tormund: She belongs in the North. The real North.
Dying Declaration of Love:
Ygritte: [Dying] Jon Snow.
Jon Snow: Hush. Don’t talk.
Ygritte: Do you remember the cave? We should’ve stayed in that cave.
Jon Snow: We’ll go back there.
Ygritte: [Tries to smile] You know nothing, Jon Snow.
Everyone Has Standards: After Jon's fake defection is revealed, she's shown happily butchering villages in the Wildlings' attempts to draw the Night's Watch into the field, but when she finds Gilly and baby Sam hiding in a Molestown brothel — not even knowing that Gilly is a Wildling herself — she spares her life, telling Gilly to stay quiet, and leaves.
Face Death with Dignity: When she believes Jon is about to execute her, she asks only that he does it clean and burns her body afterwards.
Fallen Hero: Though she was never exactly a "hero", she was shown to be a decent woman with Jon, who she loved and who loved her. After his betrayal going into Season 4, she's become much more humorless and cold, even while killing. She still has some moral standards.
Fiery Redhead: She has bright red hair and is tough as Tormund.
Go Out with a Smile: Upon being fatally shot in the chest with an arrow, Ygritte leaves Jon with a faint, mocking smile and one last utterance of her catchphrase before succumbing to her wounds in his arms. It's still visible on her face even when Jon lights her funeral pyre.
If You're So Evil, Eat This Kitten!: Pulls a variant of this to test Jon, essentially telling him, "If you're really a Wildling, fuck me" as one of Jon's Watch oaths prohibited marriage and fathering children.
Improbable Aiming Skills: Tormund notes that she has them, indicating that her failure to kill Jon with three arrows was deliberate.
In the attack on Castle Black, she snipes 8 of the Night Watch archers guarding the gate, all of which had at least partial cover.
Karmic Death: Killed with a bow and arrow by Olly, the village boy whose parents she killed with a bow and arrow.
The Lad-ette: Most of the time she comes off manlier than Jon.
The Lost Lenore: Becomes this to Jon after her death.
Love Interest: She is the love interest of Jon Snow.
A Match Made in Stockholm: Jon makes her a prisoner shortly after meeting her, and the two become romantically involved in Season 3.
Men Are the Expendable Gender: Unlike the men she fought beside, she was spared purely because Jon Snow couldn't bring himself to kill a woman — despite her trying to kill him.
The Modest Orgasm: Amusingly, whilst in the middle of an Ironic Echo of her catchphrase:
Ygritte: You know nothing, Jon Sno-Ooh-Oohh!
Oop North: Has an even stronger Northern accent than Jon Snow, Justified as she's from North of the wall.
Or Are You Just Happy to See Me?: "Did you pull a knife on me during the night?"
Proud Warrior Race Guy: She thinks of herself and the Wildlings as a proud race of free badasses.
Secret-Keeper: She knows that Jon joined the Wildlings to spy on them for the Watch, but hopes to sway him to her side.
Sword over Head: Jon can't bring himself to kill her when ordered to. And, despite Ygritte vowing to kill him for the entirety of Season 4 and coldly massacring just about anyone else who gets in her path, she hesitates killing Jon when she finally has him dead to rights and they can't even hold back smiles at seeing one another again, despite being in the middle of a battle — but then she is shot In the Back by a third party, much to Jon's devastation.
The Tease: She has fun with Jon by teasing him relentlessly.
Uptight Loves Wild: Jon is definitely uptight when he meets her, Ygritte loosens him up.
Villainous Friendship: Ygritte and Tormund are shown to be fairly close to one another throughout the series. Ygritte is quick to defend him from Styr, and Tormund is quick to help guide her relationship with Jon. This is demonstrated to its fullest in the Season 4 finale: in spite of everything, what remains Tormund's one concern right up until the end, even as he's languishing in one of the Watch's prison cells? That Ygritte receives a proper funeral in the homeland she loved.
Villain Respect: In Season 2, after their first meeting, she shows a bit of this to Jon.
Ygritte: You're brave. Stupid, but brave.
Woman Scorned: After Jon chooses his duty over her, she puts three arrows into his back. Though it's later noted that with her archery skills, she easily could have killed him, indicating she still feels something for him. Tormund lampshades it later, when he tells Jon he knew Ygritte loved him from the fervor with which she wanted to kill him.
Tormund: Snow, did you love her? She loved you.
Jon Snow: She told you?
Tormund: [shakes his head and chuckles] All she ever talked about was killing you, that's how I knew.
Would Not Hurt A Child: She spares Gilly and young Sam's lives because the latter is only a baby.
You Wouldn't Shoot Me: You know nothing, Jon Snow.