The Ace: Ironically, despite having the worst personality when she was alive, she's the most competent of the protagonists in the afterlife. Out of the four main characters, she's constantly the one who has good ideas, finds solutions to the problems, and understands the situations.
Age-Gap Romance: Eleanor flippantly mentions being frequently hit on by men Michael's (physical) age, though she never specifies whether she took them up on the offer.
Age Insecurity: Implied by the fact that she frequently lied about her birthday during her time on Earth.
Eleanor: October 14, 1986. (beat) So sorry, that's what I used to tell people when I lied about my age. I was born in 1982.
Michael: You lied so much, you forgot your own birthday. Not a great start.
Alcoholic Parent: Eleanor's mother is all but said to be an alcoholic, and her drinking habits are shown to have put a damper on Eleanor's formative years.
All-Loving Hero: In the end, she helped save all of humanity. In fact, she wasn't able to find the peace necessary to go through the Door until she'd saved the last two lost souls in existence: Michael and Mindy St. Clair.
Appropriated Appellation: After Michael says he thinks of humans as "cockroaches, or dung beetles, any little thing that crawls around in its own filth," she dubs the group Team Cockroach.
Badass Normal: She understandably laments her newfound burden as potential savior of the entirety of humankind in Season 4, telling Michael she's just a normal girl from Arizona. Although all of this is true, Michael reminds her that this same mundane mortal dirtbag from Arizona also beat out the then-evil demon Michael's torture systems nearly 800 times.
Became Their Own Antithesis: Eleanor spends Seasons 1-3 as a Cosmic Plaything who consistently undergoes Character Development to become a better person. The tables turn in Season 4 where, as Michael's compassionate Dragon-in-Chief, she runs the new experiment and gets a taste of what he was dealing with, including lying to everyone for the greater good and trying to improve the new humans' characters.
Being Evil Sucks: Eleanor's selfishness and cynicism when she was alive never brought her any joy or made her happy, preventing her from ever fully growing as a person and pushing away many of her friends and romantic interests.
Being Good Sucks: In Season 3, Eleanor is annoyed when her conscience tells her to do good when it's a great inconvenience to her. Like when she returned a wallet and didn't take the money, though she is moved to tears when the owner says that he was more worried about losing his daughter's drawing within the wallet and says Eleanor is a good person. She was very close to destroying her mother's new life, and no one would blame her since Donna Shellstrop is a horny, embezzling, dog-killing liar that destroyed her first daughter's childhood. The only reason Eleanor didn't is that she refused to hurt her new stepsister Patricia, and instead told Donna to make sure not to fork up the little girl's life.
Berserk Button:
She lashes out at someone for asking, "Why are you like this?"
People taking the moral high ground. As in, not trying to take the high ground over her specifically, but in general, since it hits her insecurities and makes her lash out, as shown with one of her boyfriends in life, as well as the way she rants out Chidi when he calls her out on her behavior.
Big Sister Instinct:
Much to her surprise, this mixes with her envy that Patricia is getting a better childhood than Eleanor ever did since Donna is being the mom to her stepsister that Eleanor always wanted. But Eleanor clues in that Donna is occasionally tempted to return to her old ways, and bluntly tells her to not fork up Patricia's life the way Donna forked up Eleanor's childhood.
She's also somewhat of a big sister to Jason. Although they're both roughly around the same age, Eleanor is notably very patient with Jason; listens to his meaningless tirades, even when she doesn't have to; and treats him the same way any exasperated big sister would treat a little sibling. They even have a routine of high-fiving one another whenever one of them cracks a particularly dirty joke.
One of her top point gains as revealed in Season 1 was frequently spending time with her cousin's daughter, Little Julie, because the cousin was "kind of a mess." As this was one of her higher point totals, it's clear she did this for completely altruistic reasons, and didn't gain anything from doing so; she just genuinely wanted to help her.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Eleanor is/was this, especially in her adult life. She was determined enough as a teen to work two jobs while attending high school and appears to have put herself through college. She even got a full-time job offer at a successful company, but she blew it off in favor of a commitment-free, morally dubious sales job and appears to have had zero ambitions before she died. In the afterlife, she's smart enough to get a B+ on a college-level essay on moral particularism (only slightly lower than the highly educated Tahani's grade) but she's so committed to being a self-absorbed slacker most of the time, she's almost on the same level as Jason.
But Not Too Bi: She is confirmed to be bisexual and has made comments about being attracted to women. However, all her official relationships (or at least all the ones that have been mentioned or shown) have been with men. In fact, her comments about finding women hot are usually Played for Laughs and restricted towards hypothetical fantasies.
Celebrity Crush: She has one for "Stone Cold" Steve Austin.
Celebrity Paradox: Her favorite movie is the clip of John Travolta saying "Adele Dazeem". Which he did to introduce her singing a song from a movie also starring Kristen Bell.
Character Development: She starts off as a completely selfish and amoral jerk, before becoming The Leader of Team Cockroach. Her changing under Chidi's tutelage ruins Michael's plan for an innovative Bad Place, which depended on her being static forever. In Season 2 she's matured from a selfish person who cares about no one but herself to being the only one who passed Gen's test of character... and then lies about it when she found out everyone else failed. In Season 3, she becomes willing to shed her hard exterior and says Screw Destiny in the face of impending torture, on realizing that she had become a better person. She also uses her lying for the good of the new experiment when Michael has a breakdown.
Child Hater: Downplayed. While Eleanor certainly hates a number of things that pertain to children, such as baby showers, children's dance recitals, or people just talking about their kids, she doesn't appear to have much against children in general, although she did get into 88 separate fights with children trying to sell her things for fundraisers. She seems to like Donna's stepdaughter Patricia just fine, even if she is a bit jealous of the affection she receives from Donna that she herself never received at that age. Her highest point count total in life also came from the genuine love she showed for her younger cousin.
Consistent Clothing Style: Her fashion sense tends towards casual clothes in blue and pink, often jeans and a flannel shirt, appropriate for a "trashbag from Arizona."
The Cynic: When she was living, she believed that the world was so full of bad things and people that even trying to do anything good was pointless. Although under Chidi's influence she softens into the Knight in Sour Armour, her basic cynicism enables her to see through the Masquerade. Repeatedly.
Dark and Troubled Past: Her parents were self-absorbed ash-holes who ignored her to the point that she asked them to sign emancipation papers when she was fourteen and they just shrugged. ("Oh, this is a joint, do you have a pen?") Apparently, the next 15 years didn't go much better, because she descended into self-absorbed ash-holery herself.
Depraved Bisexual: Though the show downplays both the depravity and the bisexuality. Her attraction to Tahani is rampant and text, but she's only ever shown to be in relationships with men. As for depravity... she's Eleanor.
Died on Their Birthday: The Season 2 finale, "Somewhere Else", reveals she died on her birthday.
Dissonant Serenity: She is eerily calm after being told that she's dead and in The Good Place.
Drowning My Sorrows: Implied. It's her first suggestion after figuring out that Michael can't get her to The Good Place.
Emancipated Child: She legally emancipated herself from Doug and Donna when she was only fourteen years old. They didn't put up a fight, and seemed happy to be rid of their responsibility towards her.
Everyone Has Standards: Even at her worst, Eleanor can't bring herself to cross certain lines.
In the second episode, despite how self-centered she is, she is still horrified at the possibility that two people who annoyed her have been crushed by a falling dumpster.
She briefly hesitated over blowing off house-sitting for a friend because she didn't want to leave her friend's dog to starve. Her solution was to leave all the food out, which led to said dog getting morbidly obese but still alive.
No matter how she mistreats or insults Chidi, she insists that he is a good person with no ulterior motives. She asks outright why Chidi was sent to the Bad Place, since compared to her he never did anything wrong.
She tells off her mother for arriving drunk to Doug's funeral and insulting him; she doesn't say it, but she wants the space to grieve the only father she knew.
In Season 1, she is more than willing to press the button that will "end" Janet's life... till Janet starts begging and pleading for her life. She finds it far to realistic to feel comfortable following through with it, despite Janet insisting that she will feel no pain and the begging / pleading is nothing more than a failsafe mechanism.
In "Rhonda, Diana, Jake, and Trent", she is the most adamant about No One Gets Left Behind when everyone schemes to escape Shawn. Michael has to distract her to push her into the portal to get to the judge because she was screaming at him to stop before Shawn caught him.
While she could be mean to kids outside of her family, she is remarkably kind to the kids who are related to her. She took a cousin on a nice outing for a churro dog, and upon meeting her stepsister Patricia, told their mother Donna to make sure that she didn't fork up Patricia's life the way that Donna messed up Eleanor.
Two examples that are played for laughs - Removing both shoes and socks on an airline is too much, and flossing in an open office is a crime worthy of eternal torture.
Evil Can Not Comprehend Good: "Evil" is a bit too strong here, but when she was alive, she couldn't fathom people being genuinely nice and altruistic for the sake of it and always assumed they had some ulterior motive.
Expy: During the first season, she's one for Inès Serrano from No Exit, being a nasty antisocial lady who hits on their female companion (Estelle in No Exit and Tahani in The Good Place), freely admits that she was a terrible person in life, and is the first to realize how and why they're all being tortured. After the events of the first season, though, she goes through Character Development and quickly evolves beyond her similarities to Inès.
Fetishes Are Weird: She appears to have a fetish for mailmen. She was even banned from the post office for repeatedly asking a mailman to take his shirt off.
Fictional Fan, Real Celebrity: Eleanor is vocal about her Celebrity Crush on "Stone Cold" Steve Austin, and "once lied about having a terminal illness to meet Scott Wolf."
The Foil: To Tahani. Michael Schur remarked that the creation of Tahani constituted a search for an actress and character who could contrast Kristen Bell’s Eleanor in every way. So where Eleanor is petite, blonde, grubby and very uncouth, Tahani is tall, curvy, regal and effortlessly composed "like a brown Grace Kelly."
Forgotten Birthday: She got her emancipation papers on her fourteenth birthday, after her parents expectedly forgot to buy her a present.
Freudian Excuse:
Part of the reason she's suspicious of Donna Shellstrop having reformed is that Donna never found a reason to reform for her and regularly emotionally abused her firstborn daughter. Donna killing her dog by accident and going into an inappropriate Kick the Dog speech towards Eleanor, who was at the oldest six or seven, was one such example.
She explicitly states post-Heel–Face Turn for real that her mother's emotional abuse was the reason why she never felt vulnerable enough to confess to a lover that she loved him or her.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: Eleanor uses her neglectful parents and broken home as an excuse for her bad behavior. While her parents are genuinely awful, painfully self-absorbed and completely immoral, she eventually realizes that her past doesn't justify her actions. She even confesses this to Jason in "Mindy St. Clair", and a large part of her Character Development involves her learning to take responsibility for her own actions and not be as selfish.
The Friend Nobody Likes: In life, she was this with the co-workers she drank with. She didn't really like them either; she was only tagging along for the drinking, not the friendship. Even among her social circle, she was either too much of a jerk for some and too nice for others.
Good Feels Good: Eleanor is very excited when she realizes that she's started doing good things because she wants to, not just as a ploy to get to stay in the Good Place. When she gets a second chance at life, it starts out this way but starts falling apart after about half a year, until Michael secretly guides her toward Chidi.
Good Is Not Nice: She's not as outwardly sweet as ethics professor Chidi or the wholesome Tahani, but she is a genuinely good person as of the later seasons.
Has a Type: Eleanor has a thing for mailmen, particularly if she can get them to take their shirt off in front of her.
Hate at First Sight: A key part of Michael's plan is that Eleanor will hate Tahani the minute they meet, for no real reason. This part is mentioned to consistently work during their stay in the Bad Place. While it's initially averted when they meet in Season 3, where their first meeting goes much better, Eleanor still takes joy in taunting and mocking Tahani when she can.
The Hedonist: When she was alive, she lived only to please herself and for instant gratification.
Hero Protagonist: She starts out as a Villain Protagonist, but slowly becomes more and more selfless and determined over the course of the show, such that by the end of the first season she's the only main character determined to sacrifice herself to the Bad Place, no matter what, for the sake of the others, and even convinces Jason to do the right thing and leave the Medium Place to save Chidi and Tahani.
Hilariously Abusive Childhood: The show bounces back and forth between treating her childhood as hilarious and horrific. Like everything else in the human condition.
Inherently Attractive Profession: Eleanor's thing for mailmen repeatedly comes up. It's implied that the uniform plays a big role in this case.
It's All About Me: When she was alive, this was her defining personality trait.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: Despite being attracted to Chidi and falling in love with him several times, Eleanor will always step aside if he showed interest in someone else. In Season 3, she starts falling for him as he teaches her ethics, but is beyond ecstatic on realizing that he's in love with Simone in the neuroscience department. She schemes to make sure Chidi asks Simone out on a date and later gains the courage to kiss her.
Jerkass Has a Point:
Eleanor is quick to point out everyone's flaws, suggesting that everyone is not as good as they seem - especially Tahani. She adds how it makes no sense to only pick the "best" people rather than have a place for "people who weren't terrible but not perfect." Michael and the Soul Squad come to agree with her.
Eleanor: What, one in a million gets to live in paradise and everyone else is tortured for eternity?!
When Chidi is down after being told his 3600 page book on ethics is a mess, Eleanor points out how "I get bored halfway through a text message" so even being able to write something so thick is an achievement to be proud of. This cheers Chidi up and gives him the motivation to rewrite his book.
While she uses it too much as an excuse for her awful behavior, her parents were genuinely terrible and neglectful people and her cynicism and selfishness resulting from her experiences with them is at least understandable.
Jerkass Realization: Eleanor was so self-absorbed that she never realized just how much of a jerk she was and thought of herself as a mildly decent person. When she is confronted with her past actions, she finally realizes just how nasty and selfish she was.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Eleanor is shown to be a flagrantly selfish and hedonistic person, but she does eventually admit to having felt some guilt for shirking her trash duties, and she's the only one who finds it wrong that people who weren't perfect but weren't utterly terrible are sent to a place of eternal torment after they die. Deep down, she is capable of great selflessness and compassion. Her confessing to not belonging in the Good Place to protect Chidi is the most heroic act she commits.
Kick the Dog: Played for Laughs. Events in her life that resulted in her losing the highest amount of points include screaming at 22 different waiters, crashing Vanessa Garcia's quinceanera, showing a 9-year-old child The Shining, cyberbullying a pregnant woman from her spin class, and getting into fights with various children for trying to sell her things for their fundraisers (88 times).
The Lad-ette: In many ways, she's written like a stereotypical uncouth man. She's also fond of women's MMA.
Lazy Bum: As part of the "brilliant, but lazy" thing noted above. Michael notes that in life, if the going got tough for Eleanor, she gave up, to the extent she just abandoned her car the minute the oil change light came on, or in another instance frequenting a coffee shop owned and operated by a pervert simply because it was closer to her apartment.
The Leader: She eventually ends up being the de facto leader of Team Cockroach, mainly the Headstrong type.
Tahani: Oh, and to Eleanor, our unofficial leader. You pack a lot of heart and grit into that diminutive frame. Like a scrappy little auto mechanic.
Loners Are Freaks: From what "Someone Like Me as a Member" reveals, when she was alive, she disliked making any emotional or social connections with others to the point she quit a high paying job for the con job she had before she died because it was required she play games with her coworkers to form bonds. She also announced at a high school she transferred to when she was younger she didn't want to be friends with anyone and refused praise from another loner who respected her actions.
Lying to Protect Your Feelings: Just as Gen tries to tell that Eleanor was the only one to pass her test and earn the right to the Good Place, Eleanor steps in and lies about her failure, so nobody would feel guilty about sending her to the Bad Place.
Magnetic Hero: Surprisingly. She is able to convince everyone on Team Cockroach, even Michael, a bona fide demon, to work together to get them into the Good Place, and eventually, to change the system altogether.
Meaningful Name:
One possible etymology for the name Eleanor comes from the life of Queen Eleanor of Aquitaine, who was christened "Aenor" after her mother and then dubbed "alia Aenor," "the other Aenor" in her native Occitan. Eleanor is also "the other Eleanor." She also shares her medieval counterpart's political savvy, flair for the dramatic, and talent for survival. Additionally, it can be said that by her learning ethics and directly trying to improve herself, she's trying to become another, better version of herself (as in, "another Eleanor").
At the same time, her name means "light-hearted", and she is nothing but.
Messianic Archetype: As insane as it sounds, she essentially served as this. She was the person that managed to convince Michael of the capacity for goodness in every human, which led to the team figuring out and fixing the rules that had doomed every human soul for over five centuries to the Bad Place, essentially making her the savior of the souls of humanity.
Minor Living Alone: She got herself emancipated at the age of fourteen, and from then on lived by herself. It's not clear if she continued going to school or had to drop out, but she mentions having to pretend to be older to get a job. The sad part is, she probably was better off this way than she was with her parents.
Mirror Character: In "The Trolley Problem", she notices that she and Michael have a disturbing amount in common. This is after she realizes that Michael is actually a demon.
Never Speak Ill of the Dead: She told off her drunk mother for turning her dad's funeral into a "roast" when she just wanted some space to grieve.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: After time is reset so that none of the main characters ever died in the first place to see if they would change their ways without the goal of a reward, Eleanor does indeed start to make an effort to be a better person after surviving the incident at the supermarket. However, her honest persona starts to have negative consequences, such as confessing to her roommate that she was the one responsible for tearing her dress and the "dress bitch" shirts resulting in the loss of her friendship and leaving an apology note on a car she ran into resulting in her receiving a lawsuit from the owner.
Noodle Incident: For unknown reasons, she has a lifetime ban from Build-A-Bear Workshop.
One True Love: No matter what Michael did, no matter what ridiculous permutations or scenarios he set up, Eleanor always found Chidi, always asked him for help, and he always helped her.
There is no answer. But Eleanor is the answer.
Only Sane by Comparison:
When she was alive, she was this only when hanging out with her roommates. In the flashbacks with her co-workers, strangers, or other people, she comes off as a horrible person. But in the flashbacks with her roommates, she comes off as slightly more normal and reasonable, since Brittany and Madison were even worse people than her.
In the afterlife, she's this in the main cast. Despite being still rough and impulsive, she's easily the most perceptive and Street Smart of the four, due to Chidi being a neurotic Ditzy Genius, Tahani being an extremely shallow Idle Rich, and Jason being The Ditz. This is also due to her Character Development, since she's able to overcome the flaws she had when she was alive (being mean and selfish) much more easily than the other three with their respective flaws.
The Paranoiac: Eleanor's life turned her into a misanthrope and made her unable to trust people. While it gives her a useful advantage when people are trying to manipulate her, it's also depicted as very maladaptive, since Eleanor seeing the worst in everyone makes her unable to open up and causes her to think kind people are silently judging her faults when they are (probably) doing no such thing, such as thinking various Rite-Aid employees were judging her purchases, or that Tahani is out to get her.
Parental Neglect: Much of her behavior is explained by a flashback revealing that Eleanor's parents were truly horrible people, total deadbeats who didn't even know her birthday and blew her college savings on bail money and various idiotic schemes.
Perverse Sexual Lust: In Season 3, a review of Attempt #445 shows that Michael knows that she has frequent sex dreams about Sam The Eagle from The Muppets, which Eleanor simply responds that she finds his authority reassuring.
Pint-Size Powerhouse: It's frequently noted that Eleanor is quite short and petite. However, in the third season Bar Brawl she effortlessly knocks out the demon Vicky with one punch, and this is after Vicky had taken multiple blows from Janet with much less effect. Evidently, Eleanor knows a thing or two about bar fights.
Properly Paranoid:
Earlier in Season 1, she correctly guesses that the marriage counselor and identity fraud expert couple wants to swing with her and Chidi. First they attempted to while posing as humans, then after the reveal of the twist they're shown in a flashback laughing with Michael and saying they could probably get Eleanor and Chidi to do it.
On a more serious note, she had usually been the one (except for Jason one time) to blow Michael's attempts at secretly torturing the 4 humans by revealing that they're really in the Bad Place, across over 800 different reboots with their memories wiped each time.
Proud Beauty: She is confident in her own appearance, but usually done congratulating a current love interest for landing her rather than treating guys as a Meal Ticket. This often slides into the conversation at odd times, even when not appropriate.
Eleanor: [when trying to cheer Chidi up about Michael not seeming to take to his lessons] Teaching [Michael] to be good... it's like teaching me how to be not hot. How would you even do it? You'd have me hunch or something and then stand there and say "gurp, gurp, gurp"? I don't even know. I can't even picture it because I've been hot my whole life.
Chidi: I'm sorry. Who is this conversation for again?
Queer Establishing Moment: In the Season 1 finale Eleanor offhandedly states that "I might actually be attracted to Tahani". She expresses attraction to other women later on.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red Oni to Chidi's Blue Oni. She's a headstrong and impulsive Womanchild and, especially before her Character Development, very hedonistic, while Chidi is a levelheaded intellectual type and much more hesitant and thoughtful about his actions (to the point of paralyzing indecisiveness).
Shipper on Deck: In Season 3, she pushes Chidi to date Simone when it's apparent that they're into each other.
Significant Name Overlap: The pretense of her being in Neighborhood 12358W is that she died alongside another woman named Eleanor Shellstrop in the same accident, and when this woman shows up they start referring to her and our Eleanor as "Real" and "Fake" Eleanor, respectively. Ironically, "Real" Eleanor is actually a demon named Vicky and the whole thing was a ruse, and in the end Eleanor is the one and only.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man:
She would never admit it, but Eleanor's taste in men tends to go towards the Nice Guy Understanding Boyfriend who put up with a lot from her.
During her first lifetime, she dated a guy named Sam long enough for him to support her at her dad's funeral, and her issue with Sam was that he worried about hurting others with ethical choices. Sam was especially patient when Eleanor's drunk mother showed up and made a scene while emotionally abusing Eleanor.
She realizes in Season 1 that she fell in love with Chidi, who risked his stay in paradise to help her reform. Later, Eleanor is heartbroken to learn that Michael erased one reboot where Chidi returned her feelings and they admitted they loved each other.
Another past boyfriend of hers was a firefighter who saved children from burning buildings.
Sir Swears-a-Lot: Played with. Eleanor certainly has a colorful vocabulary; however, since the supernaturally enforced rules of the neighborhood forbid profanity, she just constantly talks about "forking benches" and such.
Snake Oil Salesman: Eleanor's job when she was alive was to sell a fake allergy medication called NasaPRO, (and its senior citizen-marketed variant NasaPRO Silver), which legally couldn't be called medicine because it doesn't technically "work" and is technically "chalk".
Chidi: So your job was to defraud the elderly... Sorry, the sick and elderly?
Eleanor: But I was very good at it. I was the top salesperson five years running.
Sour Outside, Sad Inside: Eleanor is initially, a rude, selfish, cynical person. She also had an absolutely terrible childhood that taught her she couldn't rely on anyone, even her own parents.
Eleanor robot: I'm Eleanor Shellstrop. I mock others to distract myself from the emptiness inside me.
Spanner in the Works:
Eleanor, to the shock of everyone (including herself), genuinely reformed under Chidi's tutelage. This completely ruined Michael's plans and forced him to bring in Shawn to try and get things back under control. She also always figures out that she, Chidi, Tahani and Jason are all actually in The Bad Place, being used to torture each other.
In the second season, it doesn't matter what new tricks Michael comes up with to make the four humans think they're in the Good Place, most of the time it's Eleanor who figures out where they are. After it happens more than eight hundred times, Michael is forced to team up with them as the only way to break the eternal stalemate.
Spotting the Thread: She's surprisingly good at this, at least compared to the rest of Team Cockroach. In all of the iterations of the neighborhood, she's (almost) always the one that eventually notices that it's really the Bad Place for some small reason, and during the Judge's Secret Test of Character, she quickly notices that Chidi isn't the real Chidi based on an out-of-character remark.
Stealth Pun: Eleanor's favorite food is shrimp, which makes sense as she's quite "shellfish."
Stepford Snarker: At one point, she is called out for constantly mocking others as a way to distract herself from the emptiness inside her. She admits this is a fair observation.
Street Smart: Eleanor doesn't fall easily for traps and has shown an ease to figure out when people are lying to her or plotting against her, she's a very good judge of character and capable of detecting small things that can be used as hints to figure out something when others are talking.
Suspiciously Specific Denial: Will often turn to a convoluted and very specific example from her own life when emphasizing a point, and will then proceed to deny that it's based on a true story. Eventually she starts admitting when they're based on actual events.
Tiny Tyrannical Girl: Because she's 5'1", she's a good deal shorter than everyone else in the main cast and most people on the show in general, but she still manages to intimidate people due to her short temper and headstrong nature.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The Tomboy to Tahani's Girly Girl. Tahani is warm-hearted, has a feminine fashion sense, and is a social butterfly while Eleanor is a blunter Lad-ette.
Tomboy with a Girly Streak: Eleanor might be a crass, hypersexual Lad-ette, but she also enjoys celebrity gossip, keeping up with Kendall Jenner's Instagram feed as well as her entire family tree, and The Real Housewives of Atlanta. She also takes pride in her own beauty and brags about her hotness very frequently.
Took a Level in Kindness: Eleanor doing this deliberately, in the hopes of becoming the kind of person who deserves to be in The Good Place, is half the premise of the show. She succeeds to the point that she's willing to go to The Bad Place to spare those she feels are genuinely more deserving of paradise. It's only really started to stick in the Season 3 finale, because for once her memories aren't wiped and she pulls herself together to pose as the architect of the Fake Neighborhood.
Trademark Favorite Food: She absolutely loves shrimp. Her Apology Gift from Michael is even an Infinite Shrimp Dispenser (a soda machine with shrimp in place of ice, with various dipping sauces). She also really loves margaritas.
Tsundere: Towards Chidi, no matter what iteration, as Mindy lampshades.
Undignified Death: Eleanor's memory of her own death was erased because it was "traumatic and embarrassing". She bent over to pick up a bottle of Lonely Gal Margarita Mix For One in a parking lot, and a long column of shopping carts plowed into her. She was carried into the street and struck by a billboard truck advertising an erectile dysfunction pill. Funnily enough, the first EMT to arrive was an ex-boyfriend of hers...
Unkempt Beauty: While being in the Good Place usually keeps her fairly well groomed and fashionably dressed, her natural style tends to be jeans and a sweatshirt and is no less stunning with them. This provides a contrast to Tahani, who is part of The Beautiful Elite.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: In her life on Earth she was selfish, angry, spiteful and self-absorbed... but part of this was from neglectful parents that made her independent to a fault. So it's not entirely unjustified but she does have a good side and it doesn't take much for her to be better.
You Are Worth Hell: She told Chidi this in two timelines, saying no matter what happened to them in the Bad Place or the many dimensions, she loved him and that's all that mattered. Unusually for Chidi, he reciprocated her feelings.