Abhorrent Admirer: Downplayed, as she is physically attractive, but Tahani's brief attraction to Chidi at the end of season one is only met with his shock and confusion.
Abusive Parents: Her parents heaped praise on her sister, while barely acknowledging any of her accomplishments, and belittling those they do. And they topped it all off by misspelling her name as "Tahini" ("like the sauce") in their will.
Accidental Hero: This happens twice, as a matter of fact. She's the reason that the Soul Squad got to see the Judge! When Eleanor jokingly said that Tahani would always ask to see the manager after the entire team was Drowning My Sorrows, Tahani actually realizes it's a good idea. She says they should go see the Judge and plead their case. Cue about two years of Earth time where everyone realizes the morality system is broken, including Gen. The second time, Tahani while trying to help Jason and Janet with their feelings, vents to Michael about how her good intentions are undone by unexpected consequences. This leads to Michael's "Eureka!" Moment on why the points system is broken.
The Ace: During her life, she raised $60 billion for non-profit groups and also worked as a museum curator, a fashion model, an "It Girl" and was Baz Luhrmann's muse. She frequently name-drops extremely famous celebrities as friends or people she's influenced, and when she does so in front of a truth-testing device, it confirms it as true.
Actually Pretty Funny: She finds some humor in the fact that she failed her test before the Judge to talk to her parents, who aren't real, and they still talk about Kamilah. After they insult her weight and talk about her sister, Tahani smiles and says even in this scenario they haven't changed for the better.
Affectionate Nickname: Eleanor develops a habit of calling her "babe", especially in Season 4, when they've become close friends.
Alone Among the Couples: A rare positive variation. By the end of the series, she is the only member of the Soul Squad (excluding Michael) who is not in a romantic relationship. But considering her entire arc was about learning she doesn't need external validation to feel fulfilled, this is quite fitting.
Alpha Bench: Tahani appears to be a grown-up version of this trope as per season one, as she hasn't fully outgrown the shallowness and quick scorn of adolescence.
Always Someone Better: In spite of seeming to be almost insufferably perfect, she developed a deep inferiority complex because her sister Kamilah was even more successful and multi-talented, and her parents very openly played favorites.
Ambiguously Bi: She dates Jason in Season 2, but she sometimes gets quite affectionate with Eleanor, as well, and doesn't seem to mind the fact that Eleanor openly has a thing for her. The two were even made soulmates in at least one of the reboots, and from what little we saw, Tahani didn't seem averse to the idea of a female soulmate.
Eleanor: [translating Tahani's name] "Congratulations, beautiful."
Tahani: [smiling] Thanks, Eleanor. You big flirt.
Attention Whore: Tahani's many accomplishments were born from her insatiable desire for praise and recognition. She falls victim to this even when she knows the demons are using it to try and torture her.
Awesome Ego: Despite her selfish intentions, she's arguably the "best" of the four humans, having raised over $60 billion for charitable causes. At one point she defies Michael to prove she wasn't a good person in life and it takes him showing her how she died note  for her to acknowledge her own pettiness.
Her ego is even used as a form of torture numerous times. In two reboots, she's forced to live a humble life, being taunted with the idea that she could ask or more at any time and admit her own hypocrisy. In the final reboot, one brilliant form of torture is being asked to host a party, only for the demons to host an even better party and prove themselves better at it. In one reboot she picks a Mirror Centaur - which takes her form - as a pet, only for it to judge her incessantly.
Even her most well-known torture is based on destroying her ego. She learns that she's one of the lowest point-scorers, which feeds into her insecurities. Her soulmate, Jason, is forced to play the part of a silent monk, Jianyu, thus depriving him of the attention she believes she deserves, while Eleanor's status as Jason's confidant is intended to make Tahani jealous of the attention he gives her. Eleanor is the only person in the neighbourhood who isn't awed by Tahani, seeing her for who she is instead of who she wants to be seen as. Finally, Tahani comes to see Chidi as a more fitting soulmate for herself than Eleanor, while his own indecisive nature means he doesn't give her the attention she craves, either.
Bad "Bad Acting": Her initial attempts at acting like an average Joe during Team Cockroach's infiltration of the real Bad Place leaves a lot to be desired. She improves to the point of still being bad, but barely passable. However, the demons never suspect her for a moment.
The Beautiful Elite: Born into a wealthy English family, Tahani had access to the finest fashions and regularly mingled with high-name celebrities; to the point that her diary includes a foreword by Kylie Minogue and Malala Yousafzai.
Big-Breast Pride: She has a busty figure, something she points out with pride multiple times.
Bench in Sheep's Clothing: In Season 1 and the first few episodes of Season 2, she is implied to be quite judgmental and cruel, although she hides it well under her faux-polite demeanor. As the show progresses, she grows beyond this mindset, seeking to be genuinely good for the sake of it.
British Stuffiness: Her plummy British demeanor is often Played for Laughs.
Tahani: As us Brits are fond of saying: try your best to hide your sadness!
Broken Ace: Tahani is a mess of self-esteem issues and is unable to handle being anything less than the best. She also hides her disappointment in being unable to connect with her soulmate Jianyu. And then there's her family...
Butt-Monkey: A downplayed example. While lauded by most everyone in the Good Place, Michael (who's consistently nice to everyone) often is frustrated by her narcissism and puts her down a lot. She's also spent virtually her entire life being mercilessly belittled, insulted, and talked down to by her own family.
Buxom Beauty Standard: Tahani notes that her bosom is large more than once approvingly, and Eleanor was caught Eating the Eye Candy at least once.
Calling the Old Man Out: She calls out a hypothetical version of her mother and father in "The Burrito", pointing out what lousy parents they were to her, and how doing everything they'd never approve of is what's finally made her happy.
Character Development: In Season 3, thanks to not losing her memories, she realizes that she wants to be good just for the sake of being good and not for any attention. Janet encourages her to make amends with Kamilah to save her sister from damnation, and Tahani realizes that blaming herself for their rivalry isn't the right way when their parents were "wankers". When she learns that Jason, who is her legal husband, was once married to Janet, she puts aside any mixed feelings she has about Jason and encouraged him to talk with Janet about it; while the actions backfired, it was very selfless of Tahani. Season 4 has her priming her Stiff Upper Lip to talk with her old harasser John, in the hopes of saving his soul in the new neighborhood. It all comes to a head in the final episode, where she dedicates her afterlife time to mastering multiple practical skills and then deciding to forgo on passing through the final door to become an afterlife architect so she can apply her knowledge to helping the new souls that pass through the afterlife, becoming a true philanthropist.
Combat Pragmatist: When dragged into a brawl with demons, all of whom are skilled fighters, and many of whom are much bigger than Tahani (making physically overpowering them nearly impossible), she grabs a pool cue, boasting twelve years of fencing experience... and promptly beans a demon over the head with the stick, forgoing any flashy display of her skills in favor of just hitting him as hard as she possibly can.
Tahani: Obviously, I'd never do that during a competition. That'd be a three-tenths deduction!
Competition Freak: A childhood plagued by resentment of her perfect younger sister, Kamilah, and a case of Abusive Parents, has led to Tahani being unhealthily obsessed with success, to the point where one failure (or second-place trophy) can result in a complete nervous breakdown.
Consistent Clothing Style: Tahani is always wearing long flowing dresses and gowns (if not in a floral pattern, then a bold solid color) to represent her wealth and femininity compared to Eleanor and Jason, who dress more casually.
Conspicuous Consumption: She apparently wears bras made of gold.
Tahani: Darling, do you remember all the rules about what can and cannot be worn inside an MRI? More specifically, what if one's brassiere is very thin, but also very pure gold?
D-Cup Distress: Her prodigious breasts are lampshaded by Tahani herself.
Tahani: Couture just doesn't fit my body. I'm cursed with ample bosom.
Eleanor: And yet you soldier on.
Desperately Craves Affection: Tahani is always fishing for compliments and praise from people due to being denied it by her parents.
Even the Girls Want Her: Aside from being considered attractive by most of the male characters on the show, Eleanor (who's implied to be bisexual) is shown to be somewhat turned on by her as well.
Expy: During the first season, she's one for Estelle Rigault from No Exit, being a haughty socialite who never seems to fully realize how grating she can be, is repeatedly hit on by her female companion (Inès in No Exit and Eleanor in The Good Place), and finds herself in a Love Triangle over a cowardly French-speaker (Garcin in No Exit and Chidi in The Good Place). After the events of the first season, though, she goes through Character Development and quickly evolves beyond her similarities to Estelle.
The Fashionista: Tahani is always seen wearing elegant dresses and cares about designer fashion, and when the neighborhood in emergency mode magically puts everyone in bright blue-yellow striped outfits her clothes is the first thing that reasserts itself as things go back to normal, in an apparent act of pure will on her part. That's right, Tahani's fashion sense is strong enough to warp reality.
Tahani: That was my first time as a Fashion Don't, and I did not care for it!
Fatal Flaw: Her rich upbringing and need to feel extra special in comparison. This makes sense as she was always in the shadow of her more popular sister so she would often do good things with her money hoping to at least get her credit and attention.
First-World Problems: Because she's an extremely wealthy socialite, she's rather out-of-touch. In the first season, she mentions her Bad Place torture would be being forced to wear a knockoff handbag and drink tap water. In the second season, she thinks her version of the Bad Place would be an eternity spent in the Swiss Alps during the off season, emphasizing "off-season" as if she was disgusted. Chidi (in the first instance) and Eleanor (in the second) react with disbelief.
Chidi: That's what you think Hell is?!
It finally sinks in when the demons arrange for her to throw a party, and then take advantage of their resources to schedule a much bigger, more elaborate party at the same time - and tell her to her face this is what they plan to do. Tahani realizes, to her horror, that even though she knew about every step of this, it still gets to her.
The Foil: Michael Schur remarked during casting, that they searched for an actress/character who could contrast Eleanor/Kristen Bell in every way. So where Eleanor is petite, blonde, grubby and very uncouth, Tahani is tall, curvy, regal and effortlessly composed "like a brown Grace Kelly."
While both she and Eleanor come from abusive backgrounds, Eleanor was a single child to two neglectful parents while Tahani was neglected by her parents due to her parents’ overt preference to her sister. Eleanor is unimpressed by celebrities, while Tahani is a celebrity who constantly sought praise. In Michael’s Neighbourhood, Eleanor effortlessly gets the attention Tahani thinks she deserves, despite the fact that she knows she doesn't belong there and as such tries to fly under the radar. Eleanor's upbringing left her hesitant to form any bonds whatsoever, while Tahani's left her seeking the validation her family never gave her wherever possible.
However, Eleanor’s difficult background also gave her the street smarts and boldness she needs to solve the group’s constant problems, something that also makes her their unofficial leader. Tahani, who was rich and is used to comfort, is far more dependent and often serves an assisting role to other members of the group.
Freudian Excuse: Growing up with parents who refused to show affection or praise for anything while lavishing it on her sister, who was always the center of attention and actively contributed to Tahani's feelings of inferiority, would leave anyone with a serious complex.
Heel Realization: She eventually realizes that all the good acts she's performed were rendered meaningless, because she only did them for praise and recognition, rather than because they were good deeds. Happens again a season later when the Bad Place is torturing her by making her throw unsuccessful parties, and she realizes that it's working, which makes her realize that she's a frivolous, prideful person.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: She and Eleanor become this in Season 4, while Eleanor is heartbroken about Chidi losing his memories and having to stop Simone from destroying the neighborhood. Tahani insists on hugging her and constantly offers comfort. She tells Eleanor after getting her memories of the 802 reboots that she wants to be a better friend to her and hates how petty their rivalry was. Eleanor eventually admits that Tahani is her best friend in "The Funeral To End All Funerals".
Hidden Depths: Season Two reveals she's a good actress and it's something she genuinely enjoys.
History with Celebrity: Exaggerated to the point of parody. Tahani can always find an opportunity to namedrop her famous friends and acquaintances even if the situation doesn't call for it, and the actions of afterlife beings like Michael and the Judge suggest that most, if not all, of these connections are real. To start with, she can apparently count Diana, Princess of Wales, Paul McCartney, Maggie Smith, Sean Connery, Frank Gehry, and Big Ben (yes, the clock) among her godparents.
Hoist by Their Own Petard:
Quite tragically, she died trying to bring down Kamilah's statue when her sister insulted her, after sneaking in and telling off Kamilah for not inviting her. What's worse is no one had the sense to stop her until Michael interfered in the new timeline.
In Michael's second attempt, Tahani gets a unique punishment fitting for the Bad Place: She must live the humble life she claims she always wanted, living in a crappy shack of a home, eating bad food and dressing in cargo pants. Her every attempted protest is cut off by Michael saying this is meant to be the humble and caring woman Tahani claimed to be so she has to bear it.
Huge Girl, Tiny Guy: As Jason/Janyu's soulmate in Season One, she also wanted to be this with Chidi. In the first reboot this is Played for Laughs when she's given a soulmate who is 5'5, she seems to notice.
Humiliation Conga: The events leading up to her death were pretty bad, even by the standards of this show. First, she got an interview about an upcoming relief trip to Haiti she was taking... except a the interviewer wanted to talk about was Kamilah, even referring to Kamilah as an only child to Tahani's face. We then find out Kamilah was being inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame (they decided to just waive the 25-year waiting period, because, naturally, Kamilah's album was that good), and Kamilah didn't even invite Tahani to the party. So, Tahani decided to dress up as a waitress and confront Kamilah. Kamilah mocked Tahani in front of all her friends, and said Tahani was just embarrassing herself, as always. When asked if that was really how she thought of Tahani, Kamilah simply said that she doesn't think of Tahani, period. Then Tahani turned around and saw a gold statue of Kamilah. This proved to be the straw that broke the camel's back, and Tahani had a Freak Out and began to try and tear the statue down, in full view of the crowd, and succeeded… by bringing it down onto herself. To make matters worse, she died in Cleveland.
I Am Not Pretty: Played with. Tahani often mentions her attractiveness in conversations, and gives the impression of having quite a big head on her shoulders. However, other occasions show that Tahani is deeply insecure and jealous, and might merely be using her arrogant persona in order to cope with her lack of self-esteem. It doesn't help that her sister — who is often a point of envy for Tahani — is beautiful.
I Am Very British: She keeps her posh British accent in the afterlife, and Eleanor mocks it a few times.
I Choose to Stay: She's the only one of Team Cockroach to not pass through the Last Door at the end of the series. Instead, she decides to become an Afterlife Architect like Michael to help other souls reach their ultimate potential.
Idle Rich: In season three, Tahani laments this, saying that due to her wealth and social affluence she's never been forced to gain any true skills (sans party-planning and the like), as opposed to Eleanor's inherent scrappiness.
I Just Want to Be Loved: Ultimately, this is the crux of her problems. Even though she had many friends and admirers, lived an incredibly exciting life, and has a list of accomplishments that most people could never dream of achieving a fraction of, Tahani wasn't ever really happy. All she wanted was to gain the same level of recognition and appreciation that Kamilah got, especially from their parents. It's hard not to wonder if Tahani would've turned out this way if her mother and father had raised her with love and affection. Towards the end of Season 2, Tahani begins to make steps towards growing out of this issue. She breaks up with Jason so she can learn to stand on her own two feet, and finally accepts that her parents would never treat her well, no matter what she did — and that's their problem, not hers. The reason why she and Eleanor have a better relationship in Season 3 is because Eleanor is the first person to not praise Kamilah in Tahani's presence, and who admits that she needs the Brainy Bunch as much as Tahani needs true companionship.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: Tahani is always praising herself, to the point of annoying Eleanor and Michael. She is thrown for a loop when she discovers she's second-to-last in the rankings of everyone in the Good Place and puts herself in danger by abandoning the curfew Michael set up to fix the sinkhole to help them out. The fact that all her charitable works were done in the name of self-aggrandizement rather than altruism got her sent to the Bad Place.
Informed Attribute: Jameela Jamil is certainly a tall woman (1.8 m), but the show has lots of jokes that make it sound as though she towers over everybody (as in S04E12, "Patty," where she says that she feels like Dorothy arriving in Oz, as she's taller than everybody else). She doesn't — for instance, she shares many scenes with 6-foot-2 Michael and Janet, who's a mere inch shorter. Justified, as her height is apparently a point of pride for Tahani herself, so she understandably milks it.
Innocently Insensitive: Has a habit of doing this, talking to Eleanor about "belonging" in the Good Place while unaware she doesn't, and throwing a happy retirement party for Michael before learning that retirement for Architects is not pleasant and that the pinata she made of him happens to be in extremely poor taste. More seriously, in Season 3 she gets married to Jason to share her money with him after they all get condemned to the Bad Place... completely forgetting she's engaged to Larry, who shows up with their suitcases to go to the airport.
Ironic Death:
It's finally revealed in "Team Cockroach" she died crushed under a massive gold statue of her sister. She's most upset about the fact that it happened in Cleveland.
In a variation, after a life—and several afterlives—of wealth, privilege, and only doing good deeds for praise, she ends the series not by passing through the Last Door, but instead deciding to become an Architect herself. She starts at the very bottom of the company as an intern and plans to truly help others because it's the right thing to do.
It's All About Me:
Downplayed. Most of her warm philanthropic appearance is a front and she greatly values surface gloss and receiving praise, but she is capable of acknowledging other peoples' feelings (even if it takes her a bit of a run-up).
A recurring problem for Eleanor and Chidi in Season 1 is Tahani trying to force "Jianyu" to break his vow of silence, not caring about his apparent view on the matter. When it looks like he has started speaking, Tahani leaps to the assumption that Eleanor and Chidi did this as a surprise for her. After that, she assumes she and Chidi are soul-mates, declares her love for him, and never once considers he doesn't return the feelings (as Eleanor points out, her declaration is more telling him he loves her than anything else).
Jerkass Has a Point: The way everyone ignores her in order to gush about her sister Kamilah would give most people a serious complex. And despite her selfish motives, Tahani did accomplish some truly remarkable things through hard work and dedication yet everyone was always fixated on Kamilah. Plus Kamilah is a very callous and self-centered person as well.
Jerkass Realization:
In the first season finale, it finally hits her that she's in the Bad Place because all her "charity work" was just for attention and her own ego rather than helping others.
In "Team Cockroach", Michael shows Tahani that she died by accidentally crushing herself beneath her sister's statue, in a juvenile attempt to deal with her envy, rather than going to Haiti to help with the relief efforts like she planned. It makes Tahani truly realize that all the good things she did while she was alive were just for the attention and an attempt to measure up to Kamilah. Breaking down at the fact she wasted her life, she now wants to learn to be the woman she always believed she was.
She gets her memories of the reboots back in "Employee of the Bearimy" and tells Eleanor expressly that she wants to be a better friend to her. Tahani admits that she wasn't very nice in the first timeline and wants to treat Eleanor better.
The Lancer: To Eleanor. Both of them are stark contrasts to one another in personality and also ultimately gain a Heterosexual Life Partners-style dynamic after undergoing 802 reboots together in Michael's Fake Neighborhood.
Lonely Rich Kid: She grew up very wealthy but with parents who showed her zero affection or kindness, and a younger sister who was raised to be her competition and superior.
Lovable Alpha Bench: She was the social center of the Good Place during her initial stay there, and while she is very self-centered, she does care about her friends and will do what she can to help them.
Marriage of Convenience: In Season Three, when trying to rid herself of her materialism and comforts, she decides to give a large chunk of her money to Jason. The bank won't let her just transfer the funds to him, so she decides to circumvent the issue by marrying him. Nothing romantic about it, just an easy way to give him legal access to her money.
Meaningful Name: Lampshaded by her. In Arabic, Tahani means 'congratulations' and Al-Jamil is 'beautiful', so her full name means 'congratulations, beautiful'.
Ms. Fanservice: An non-exploitative example, with her almost always wearing very flattering and ornate outfits that show off how pretty she is without serving only as fodder for the Male Gaze. It's even amusingly lampshaded at one point early on into Season 2, when Eleanor freely admits that despite hating Tahani at that point in the series, she's also very attracted to her.
Ms. Vice Girl: As condescending, arrogant, and shallow as she is, Tahani's too kindhearted to really qualify as a Jerk with a Heart of Gold, and she did do a whole lot of good. Yes, her motivations were corrupt, but she still helped a lot of people when she was alive.
The Muse: She was Baz Luhrmann's muse for a time, which according to her involved a lot of standing around looking pretty while he threw glitter on her.
Nice Girl:
Played with. One has to be one by default to get into the Good Place, and Tahani raised millions for charity on top of that. Eleanor initially suspects this to be a front, but finds that while Tahani is obliviously condescending and self-absorbed, she is genuinely well-meaning, compassionate and sweet. However, she is still a bit too snobbish and Secretly Selfish to be a truly straight example.
It's played straighter in Season 3 where after all the Soul Sqaud gets condemned, she decides to give her money away to charity and people on the street — the latter at Jason's suggestion — and resolves to do good for the same of being good rather than trying to measure up to Kamliah. While she still reverts to childish behavior in her sister's presence, she manages to settle their rivalry. When Eleanor confesses about how she has feelings for Chidi after learning they were a couple in the fake Good Place, Tahani gives her kind advice to tell Chidi if Eleanor wants to date him again, and assumes they must have all been friends in the fake neighborhood. Eleanor doesn't have the heart to tell the truth.
No Sense of Personal Space: Early on, aside from the many innocently insensitive comments she makes, Tahani had a habit of "booping" Eleanor on the nose, which Eleanor really doesn't like. She drops this in Season 3.
"Not So Different" Remark:
Both she and Eleanor just wanted to be loved by their parents and the actions they took because of that lack of love drove them to the behavior that sent them to the Bad Place. They bond over this in season 3 when Tahani pays for Eleanor's flight to Arizona to confront her mother.
Part of the reason why and Larry Hemsworth rekindled their relationship and got engaged is because they both have been overshadowed by their siblings and feel like no one appreicates their accomplishments. They even share a laugh over it when Michael and Janet orchestrate their meeting.
She also realizes that while John was skulking on his website, jealous and miserable and with no real friends, she was jet-setting with the beautiful elite...while being jealous and miserable and with no real friends. It inspires her to start genuinely reaching out to him.
Opposites Attract: Tahani, the rich and sophisticated socialite, gets together with the dimwitted and immature Jason in Season 2.
Across the various reboots, she gets paired as supposed "soul mates" with Jason, Eleanor, and Chidi. And goes with it with no objections every time.
Overshadowed by Awesome: While considered one of the most talented and sophisticated people in the Good Place, Tahani all through her life was constantly outdone by her sister Kamilah. It got so bad that a reporter interviewing Tahani about her accomplishments starts asking questions about Kamilah instead and completely forgets about Tahani, to the point where she mistakenly identifies Kamilah as an only child! It's indicated the only reason her death is memorable at all is because she was crushed by a gold statue of her sister. In Cleveland.
Parody Sue: Tahani is initially presented as one when her many achievements are first detailed, but it's subverted when it is revealed that she is incredibly spoiled and self-centered. All her efforts were just a way to show to her parents that she was just as good as her younger sister Kamilah, who is the real Parody Sue and who outdoes Tahani in every possible area.
Pop-Cultural Osmosis Failure: As part of a Running Gag, Tahani can class some of the world's most famous and influential people - ranging from royalty and religious leaders to actors and musicians. However, Chidi's Choice has her encounter a poster of Ariana Grande in Jason's bud-hole and wonder if it's a relative of his. While Grande wasn't quite as famous in the year Tahani died note  she was still a renowned singer and actress, making it odd that Tahani wouldn't recognize her.
Befitting her Upper-Class Twit tendencies, she's also never heard of Walmart, one of the world's largest and most famous retail chains.
Proud Beauty: She's well-aware of her own attractiveness and is overall rather vain about it.
Pungeon Master: Enjoys naming her baked goods and desserts with themed puns. For example, at Michael's retiring party she had on display 'Retire-Mint' chocolate cake and 'Flan Voyage', and made donut holes when Michael and Janet were attempting to fix the giant sinkhole.
Rage Breaking Point: Kamilah is the only person who can inspire this out of her; Tahani and Eleanor will bicker, but Eleanor will never hurt her as much as her sister did. Tahani died after having a breakdown at Kamilah's latest party, snapping when her sister insulted her and called her out for making a scene. She tried to bring down a statue of Kamilah, only for it to crush her. In the new timeline, Tahani gets furious when Kamilah continues to insult her two years after said incident — one which snapped Tahani out of her breakdown— and won't talk about their shared trauma, bringing a fire ax to break a table.
Refusing Paradise: Played with: Although the series ends with the four main characters ending up in the Good Place, Tahani ultimately decides not to head through the Last Door at the end of the afterlife, electing instead to become an Architect like Michael so that she can spend eternity helping people who need guidance.
Rich in Dollars, Poor in Sense: Downplayed, but there. In life - and despite all claims to the contrary - Tahani revelled in her own wealth and status even while raising money for charitable causes, and shows that she has no idea how those less fortunate than her live their lives. For example she's never heard of Walmart, and at one point believes that $18000 AUS note  is a small amount of money while everyone else in the room is clearly happy for Eleanor's good luck. This even extended to wealthy people less rich and influential than her, as she once spent an entire party sitting alone in the exclusive area of a VIP deck of a party rather than mingle with her peers simply because it was there. As part of her character development she makes an earnest effort to get over this, becoming a more thoughtful, empathetic, and wise person. Reaches its peak in the finale, which sees her master every possible practical skill and eventually become an Architect, spending eternity helping others get over their issues and earn their spot in The Good Place.
Rich Kid Turned Social Activist: In season three, after finding out about the points system in the afterlife, she decides to focus on becoming a better person for the sake of it, leading her to become something of this trope.
This trope reaches its apex in the Grand Finale, when she first spends her time in the Good Place learning practical skills. Then, she chooses not to walk through the Last Door and instead decides to help with the reformation of the afterlife by becoming an Architect herself, even taking the position of an intern so she can truly learn the ropes.
Rightly Self-Righteous: Much to Eleanor's chagrin, Tahani is a genuinely nice and caring person even if she can be a little condescending and boastful.
Running Gag: Tahani drops names at least thrice per episode, mentioning places she visit, things she did and how she knows several celebrities.
Secretly Selfish: The many good deeds she performed in her life were negated by the fact that she only did them to gain attention and try to outdo her sister.
Sheep in Sheep's Clothing: Tahani is more than a little self-righteous and obliviously condescending, but otherwise every bit as kind as she appears, despite Eleanor's suspicions. Tahani is so convinced that she is a good person that even she is shocked when she realizes her flaws, and it becomes the launching point for her character arc.
Shipper on Deck: In Season 3, she encourages Eleanor to confess her feelings for Chidi. She's horrified on realizing that that if Chidi wipes his memories, then he won't remember Eleanor.
Silk Hiding Steel: Played with; she often acts like this, but it turns out that she's much more emotionally fragile than she appears to be. In Season 3, she reveals that she can knock out a demon with a pool cue if her friends are in danger.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: As Eleanor's plummy, seemingly perfect, upper class neighbor who is more than a little boastful and self-righteous, Tahani really gets on Eleanor's nerves. Turns out to have been invoked, as Michael expected that they'd grate on each other. It becomes subverted in Season 3, where Eleanor is kind to her during their "first" meeting on Earth, and they truly become friends. Come Season 4, they're working together to run the new experiment and Tahani insists on comforting Eleanor after Chidi gets his memories wiped.
Skewed Priorities: Tahani has a tendency to latch on to pointless details. For example, when Eleanor explains what's going on with the Good Place, Tahani's only response is when Eleanor states Chidi doesn't love her.
Slave to PR: Ultimately, Tahani's philanthropy and good deeds were all to look good and outdo her younger sister.
Tahani: I was supposed to be in Haiti being photographed helping people...
Sliding Scale of Beauty: She's of the Level II, World-Class variety, bordering on Divine level despite being a mortal human. Eleanor is conventionally beautiful and frequently owns her hotness; Janet is a very pleasant-featured not-lady who also knows she's pretty. But Tahani's drop-dead gorgeousness is an omnipresent aspect of her life and character, to the point that a Good Place employee — who, according to Michael's description of the show's supernatural entities, shouldn't even be able to identify physical attractiveness by human standards — is stunned by her beauty (and Jason's!).
So Beautiful, It's a Curse: Played for laughs. Tahani mourns not being able to wear haute couture because of her large cup size, and her pores are so miniscule that that leave-on face masks don't stick to her skin.
Socialite: She was this in life; she spent her days mingling with the upper class and raising money for charity.
Spoiled Sweet: Zigzagged. Though Eleanor believed her to be a rich Bench in Sheep's Clothing, Tahani reveals herself to be kind and generous who used to her wealth to benefit the needy and all sorts of charity groups. Though it turns out that Eleanor wasn't entirely wrong; Tahani did those things to inflate her own ego, which is why she's in The Bad Place. However, when her memories are rebooted and she (re)learns the true nature of the afterlife in Season 3 she becomes genuinely devoted to helping people, to the point of straight-up handing out wads of cash to people on the street.
Statuesque Stunner:
Is acknowledged by everyone—including Eleanor, who calls her a "sexy skyscraper" despite herself—to be very attractive, and at one point Eleanor acknowledges that Tahani "has legs for days." Jameela Jamil was a former model and is the second tallest member of the main cast; Tahani is taller than Jason and Chidi.
Tahani: I'm just a girl, towering over a boy, asking him to admit he loves me.
Tahani's height is evidently a point of pride for her; the Bad Place even exploits this in the first reboot by claiming her soulmate is a man a head shorter than her.
Stepford Smiler: Her flashbacks make it clear that, for all her wealth, sophistication, and fame, she was not a happy person. Of course, looking at her family and the way everyone treated her in comparison to Kamilah, it's not hard to see why. It gets better in the afterlife, when she meets the others.
Stylish Sunhats: Tahani Al-Jamil (an extremely wealthy philanthropist) has a sunhat she wears out on occasions with some of her fashionable outfits.
Successful Sibling Syndrome: Suffers from this due to living her entire life in her sister Kamilah's shadow.
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: In season one, her personality was a good mix of genuine, well-intentioned (albeit sometimes condescending) kindness and jealous hostility. She appears to outgrow this trope during later seasons, though.
Supreme Chef: In Season 1, she was always baking and Eleanor admitted her cooking was good. This trait was dropped in the next few seasons.
Take a Third Option: How she ends the series: she doesn't want to stay in the Good Place any longer, but she also doesn't want to pass through the Last Door. Instead, she opts to learn how to become an Architect (the first human to ever do so) and design afterlives for others to genuinely help them improve so they can reach the Good Place, too.
The Whitest Asian Woman Tahani is English, upper class, and of Pakistani heratage. The first two are defining traits, the third almost never comes up.
Tomato in the Mirror: By the standards of the Celestial Bureaucracy, she's a bad person, and therefore in the Bad Place. She had accepted the idea that they were in the Good Place because it validated her concept of herself as a good person.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The Girly Girl to Eleanor's Tomboy. Tahani is warm-hearted, has a feminine fashion sense, and is a social butterfly while Eleanor is a blunter Lad-ette.
Undignified Death: Being crushed to death by a giant statue of her hated sister, as a direct consequence of her own actions, with the public fully seeing what a petty, selfish person she really was. Tahani, being Tahani, misses the point of the story.
Tahani: Oh no... I died... in Cleveland?
The Un-Favourite: All but outright stated to be the case. Her parents had unrealistic expectations for Tahani, unfavourably comparing her to Kamilah. When they died, they even misspelled her name in the will, calling her Tahini ("Like the sauce.").
Upper-Class Equestrian: Tahani mentions that of course she had a stable full of horses growing up, but they were only ever used to pull carriages and perform in horse ballets (dressage). Nevertheless, this is yet another posh and upper-class detail to her life.
Upper-Class Twit: A spoiled but good-natured and intelligent version, but on occasion, Tahani shows this aspect of herself, such as her idea of Hell being a vacation to the Alps in the off-season or being forced to wear a knockoff handbag, or considering marrying a duke "dallying below my station", or showing disdainful or dismissive attitudes towards working class type occupations ("I'm not a factory worker.").
Uptight Loves Wild: In Season 2, she's the "uptight" to Jason's "wild".
Wealthy Philanthropist: Born into an upper-crust British Pakistani family, she seemingly got into The Good Place by raising plenty of money for humanitarian causes.
"Well Done, Daughter!" Girl: Ultimately all her issues stem from never winning her parents' approval. In "The Burrito", she faces off against her parents one last time during her test, and finally gets closure, realizing she will never gain their approval over Kamilah, and she is better off not trying.