Action Mom: Had military training, claims to have outshot Billy on the firing range and stabs Stormfront in the eye, doing more damage to her than three Supes did combined.
All for Nothing: She made her choice to be considered dead by her family and isolate herself from the world, all so she can raise her son Ryan and ensure he does not turn out like his father Homelander. But come Season 3, Billy's actions led to Ryan being driven away straight into Homelander's arms who swiftly indoctrinating him into his misanthropic worldview. Because of that, all of Becca's sacrifices have been rendered meaningless. However, in Season 4, it shows her teachings and affection to Ryan is there as he showed sorrow and guilt when he accidentally killed Koy in a robbery stunt, once again sees the sociopathic monster his father is when Homelander tells him he shouldn't care, acknowledges to Butcher to why he wouldn't want him at all, and is shown to still miss his mother.
Alliterative Name: As Becca Butcher.
Ambiguously Christian: She used to own a necklace with St. Christopher.
Badass Normal: Just like her husband. She manages to stab Stormfront in the eye despite Stormfront outclassing her in every possible way.
Burying a Substitute: Since her body was never found, her sister put a headstone in its place so their mother has a grave to visit. Billy takes great offense, and smashes it down.
Chekhov M.I.A.: She disappeared eight years prior to the timeline of the plot. Police Never Found the Body. Then she reappears in the last scene of the first season.
The Conscience: As Billy's sentient tumor, she guides him down a moral path, such as talking him out of selling Hughie out to Victoria Neuman.
Dies Differently in Adaptation: In the comics, she died when her superpowered Child by Rape tore its way out of her. Here, it's revealed that she survived and is raising the child, but she's killed in season 2 rescuing Ryan from Stormfront.
Differing Priorities Breakup: By "Nothing Like It in the World", she refuses to be with Butcher in order to raise Ryan, while he wanted to abandon the boy so that he and Becca could be together again.
Disposable Woman: She's killed off in season 2 in order to further Billy and Ryan's character arcs.
Driven to Suicide: Officially, according to the police.
Good Parents: To Ryan. She makes sure to give him much love and care, sacrificing her previous life to be a good role-model for him. Even when Homelander and Stormfront try to pamper him with their celebrity statuses, Ryan prefers the mundane life that he had with his loving mother.
The Lost Lenore: For Butcher.
Love Cannot Overcome: She's never stopped loving Billy, but she walked out of his life after her encounter with Homelander because she knew learning about it would have sent him down a dark road. (Too bad Mallory sent him down it anyway!) In season 2, she refuses to reunite with Billy, this time because she knows she cannot have both Billy and Ryan in her life.
The Masquerade Will Kill Your Dating Life: Running off with Butcher would put them in the crosshairs of Vought and harm Ryan, whom she has kept the appearance of a proper role-model for. She wishes to stay at the compound hoping to prevent another Homelander, and she refuses to risk a life with Billy.
Morality Pet: Deconstructed. Much as Becca and Butcher hope she could bring out the good in him, she realizes that the best she can do is slow down his fall to villainy.
My Secret Pregnancy: She hid her pregnancy from anyone and disappeared without a word from Butcher's life.
Never Found the Body: She's been missing for so long that she's presumed dead, and only Billy is convinced she's out there somewhere.
Rape as Drama: She went mute and then disappeared after being raped and impregnated by Homelander.
Satellite Love Interest: We don't get to know much about her outside of being Billy's wife and Ryan's mother. Shantel Van Santen, however, does an admirable job of breathing life into the character for the little screen time she has.
Save You From Becoming Your Parent: Rebecca made a deal with Vought to have her and Ryan secluded into a safe haven where she can raise her son properly, never seeing Homelander ever again. When Homelander returns anyway, she refuses to run away with Billy for fear that Ryan will fall under his father's influence if she just disappears from his life.
Spared by the Adaptation: Downplayed. While she does die, it is years after the corresponding point in the comic, and after having briefly reunited with Butcher and making appearances in the main timeframe of the show. In the comic, she dies in childbirth.
Stepford Smiler: Imprisoned in a Stepford Suburbia surrounded by high walls and monitored by CCTV cameras inside her own home, she just concentrated on raising her son and imagined she was Carol Brady.
Walking Spoiler: The nature of her character as Billy's motivation and the circumstances regarding her disappearance is a major factor in the series.