The Ace: He's one of Vought's oldest and toughest heroes. He's not the most powerful member, but he's arguably the most competent member of the Seven. He's a highly skilled superhuman assassin and a better hand-to-hand fighter than even Maeve. He even succeeds in subduing her on Homelander's orders. He never questions orders and isn't as hedonistic and vulgar as most Supes. He's sent out to clean up the mistakes made by other members of the Seven, like being sent to kill the superpowered terrorist created by Homelander. He's also quite cultured, as he's seen drinking tea, practicing Buddhist meditation, drawing cartoon characters, and playing the Minute Waltz by Chopin on piano; Noir is one of the very few people Homelander actually respects.
The reason for his muteness. Here, it's involuntary, because Soldier Boy disfigured him and severely damaged his brain, whereas in the comics, he can speak; he just chooses not until the moment he unmasks himself as a clone of the Homelander, after which he's cackling until his last breath.
Alas, Poor Villain: Despite his ruthless crimes, one can't help but feel pity for him when he's murdered by Homelander — the son of the man who relentlessly bullied and scarred him. Homelander himself is genuinely distressed throughout the deed, which is really saying something. As Noir lies dying, his cast of imaginary friends reappear in his field of vision to "see him off", with anguished tears in their eyes, and Buster Beaver comforts him that he's about to be with Jesus.
Ambiguously Christian: In his final moments, his imaginary friend Buster Beaver tells him that he will "soon be in the sweet embrace of Christ the Lord". While this would imply that Black Noir is actually a Christian, his religion is never brought up in any other instances.
Ambiguously Evil: Black Noir is shown to be a very morally ambiguous individual. He's shown to not be necessarily as evil or manipulative as other members of The Seven (besides Maeve), though he is willing to enact any form of assassination that is needed by Vought. However he Would Not Hurt A Child and in his backstory he is seen to be quite meek as well as having aspiring hopes to be an actor. It's safe to say he wasn't a horrible person but is a man who now only follows orders as well as having a hidden innocent mindset due to the brain damage caused by Soldier Boy.
Atrocious Alias: His name literally translates to "Black Black".
Ax-Crazy: Apparently Noir enjoyed violence so much it never failed to give him a Raging Stiffie, but this tidbit came coming from the Deep, so what he says should be taken with a grain of salt. Singer does point out he did some horrible stuff in a Hard Rock Cafe and a lot of his fight scenes have him mercilessly beat Supes and butcher normal humans however he is revealed to be quite sensitive outside combat.
Batman Parody: He fills the role of Batman in the Seven's corrupted copy of the Justice League, with his black and mysterious aesthetic, use of stealth, martial arts, and weapons in place of superpowers, eerily stoic nature, questionable sanity, being The Reliable One and Best Friend to The Cape, and is one of the "big three" in the superhero group. The fact that Black Noir can still keep up with the rest of the Seven due to having superpowers is a nod to Batman's Plot Armor in the JLA crossovers, with the Dark Knight being able to perform feats that wouldn't be "realistically" possible (e.g. managing to land a punch on a speedster and not being reduced to a bloody smear after getting hit full force by a foe with Super-Strength), even for a Badass Normal.
Beware the Quiet Ones: Black Noir doesn't talk and is among the most brutal supes in the Seven. He had some military interventions on his record that should get him arrested for war crimes and he tends to not care about collateral or even killing friendlies in gruesome ways.
Beware the Silly Ones: Similarly, Black Noir is incredibly silly on occasion and provides some excellent Silent Snarker comic relief when not in battle. But when he is in battle, he is a fierce no-nonsense Implacable Man.
The Blank: His mask has this effect, resembling Batman's empty cowl. The lack of speech or physical quirks makes him seem almost robot-like. Part of what Homelander likes about him is that he is the only one who can see under Noir's mask and tell when he is smiling or nervous.
Body Horror: Underneath the suit is what can be best described as a walking corpse; Black Noir is covered by years of bruises, burns, and scars that, while mostly healed, are still largely physically intact. This is also the reason why he's unable to talk as he sustained a lacerated throat when fighting in Operation Charly. Also, he got a serious brain damage fighting Soldier Boy.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Despite being completely silent and a ruthless assassin, Black Noir is seen doing some silly things in the background, which include dancing at a club, failing to get the attention of a waiter, playing a surprisingly upbeat piece at a restaurant (Chopin's Minute Waltz), and dramatically sobbing when the secret behind Compound V is revealed. He also enjoys drinking tea and has a hobby drawing cartoon characters.
Canon Character All Along: Inverted. Black Noir isn't a clone of Homelander, but a new character named Earving.
Captain Ethnic: Zig-Zagged: He is indeed an African American man underneath the helmet but the costume was designed specifically to hide his ethnicity and improve his marketability. Any hopes he had to reveal his blackness to the public was shot down by his disfigurement during the mission in Nicaragua.
Cloud Cuckoolander: Downplayed; He hallucinates speaking with friendly cartoon characters when thinking about his past and whether or not to fight Soldier Boy after he returns. It's implied he's been hallucinating ever since Soldier Boy gave him permanent brain damage.
Co-Dragons: Serves as Stan Edgar's most trusted agent on the Seven, with many of his actions being undertaken on his direct orders, although Victoria Neuman is Edgar's most valued agent in political matters.
Color Character: Black Noir.
Combat Pragmatist: Black Noir seems to prefer knives, smashing his opponent against the environment and strangling in his fighting style. He also prefers silent takedowns and getting the drop on enemies over engaging them head-on, but his hand-to-hand combat skills and durability still put most to shame.
The Comically Serious: At social gatherings, he can be seen drinking from a straw or playing the piano. All while wearing his intimidating costume.
Corrupted Character Copy: Unlike most of the supes who are parodies of DC and Marvel heroes, Black Noir is more like an evil version of Snake Eyes from G.I. Joe. The black suit, face-concealing helmet, ninja swords, and muteness due to a past injury all resemble the American ninja hero.
Cowardly Lion: He freaks out upon learning that Soldier Boy is alive and leaves Homelander to face him on his own as he was the one who sold Ben out to the Russians. Considering how Soldier Boy treated him in Payback and the injuries he inflicted upon him before being subdued by the rest of the team, he's right to be frightened. The cartoon animals he hallucinates afterward once he retreats to an abandoned Suck E. Cheese's to cope with his issues frame it as him suffering a panic attack underneath his silent exterior, encouraging him to face Soldier Boy again despite his fears toward his old abuser... although ultimately, he dies before getting the chance.
The Cowl: Fitting for a Batman counterpart. Focusing on silent take-downs, lurking, and fighting with his bare hands, he's trained to work in secrecy and is assigned more covert operations. He has a similar position in the Seven as Batman does in the Justice League, being one of the "big three" along with Maeve and Homelander, just like Batman is one of the Justice League's three biggest names along with Wonder Woman and Superman.
Cruel and Unusual Death: Gets his guts ripped out by Homelander after the former feels betrayed by Noir withholding information from him about his relation to Soldier Boy.
Curb-Stomp Battle: Starlight, Kimiko, and Naqib don't stand a chance against him. Neither do street thugs, obviously.
Curb-Stomp Cushion: While they're unable to stop him and would've been killed had Edgar not called Noir off, Butcher, Hughie, and MM do inflict some good damage on him during their fight. They set up booby traps that ruin his stealthy approach, resulting in him triggering homemade bombs that leave noticeable wounds on his body. He's later taken off guard by Hughie with a pistol and, while the rounds bounce off his armor, at least one manages to hit home and penetrate his hand.
Decomposite Character: The comic book basis of Noir is split across several characters besides himself.
His role as the one who raped Becca is given to Homelander himself, instead of Noir merely framing Homelander as part of a gambit to drive him insane. This along with many of his other Kick the Dog moments and role as the true Big Bad are seemingly just transferred to Homelander.
Stormfront also takes over his role as the one who corrupts Homelander, though still downplayed as he was already a monster and she's just making him worse.
His comic aspect of being a countermeasure for Homelander is transferred to the show counterpart of Noir's comic book son, Ryan.
As a black man who stays out of the spotlight and is considerably less depraved than his teammates, he's similar to the comic version of The Deep.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Of The Team Normal as demonstrated by Batman. He's the most "normal" of the group in that he chooses to fight with bare fists and weapons and is responsible enough to not display any vices. It ends up making him more alien as opposed to humanizing him, due to his enigmatic and robotic nature and knowing that he's still capable enough to keep up with the rest of The Seven. It also means that when Homelander doesn't want him around anymore he's easily killed and replaced by someone else since he technically couldn't do anything any ordinary human could do.
Dented Iron: His healing factor and resilience have been tested since the Cold War, while still strong he can't talk anymore because of damage sustained to his vocal cords and brain.
Department of Redundancy Department: "Noir" in French means black. So his name is "Black Black".
Devious Daggers: Noir is a silent, stealthy "hero" who wields short blades and throws knives.
Dies Differently in Adaptation: In the comics, Black Noir dies after getting a part of his brain torn out by Butcher (albeit after sustaining heavy injuries from killing Homelander and injured further by the U.S. Military). In the show, Homelander kills him by punching a hole in his gut and tearing out his intestines, leaving Black Noir to slowly die off-screen.
Disabled in the Adaptation: The third season reveals that he is unable to speak at all because of injuries that Soldier Boy inflicted on him when the comic made it clear that he was able to speak in spite of being silent for the majority of the series. It's also implied that the injuries left him blind in one eye.
The Dog Bites Back: Attempted to fight back against Soldier Boy in Nicaragua with the rest of Payback (sans Gunpowder) after all the abuse they suffered at his hands, and while successful in disposing of him, Black Noir suffered immense physical injuries and severe brain damage that permanently handicapped his higher functions including speech.
The Dog Was the Mastermind: Black Noir was the person that planned and got a green light from Edgar to let the Russians kidnap Soldier Boy. Got extremely injured to the point of face mutilation and permanent brain damage in the process, but in the end, they were successful.
The Dragon: On top of being Co-Dragons for Edgar, he's also Homelander's most trusted associate, sticking by his side even after Edgar is ousted from Vought. It doesn't last long, as Noir leaves the moment he learns Soldier Boy is back and is killed by Homelander once he returns. Of Homelander's remaining subordinates, Ashley is too much of a doormat and the Deep is too incompetent to fill the now vacant role properly.
The Dreaded: Black Noir is deeply feared by criminals, the Boys, and even his fellow superheroes and the general public at times. Even Butcher, who is one of the very few people who aren't scared of Homelander, is shown to be somewhat afraid of him when he attacks the Boys. Noir is even more feared than Homelander (in general) due to the public being unaware of Homelander's true nature, which gives the Boys a small but specific and very good weakness to exploit. The Boys have nothing to bargain with when it comes to Black Noir as he is such a mysterious character that their threats and bribes do not affect him, Butcher was only able to call him off by blackmailing Stan Edgar, not Noir himself.
Dropped a Bridge on Him: Noir is effortlessly executed by Homelander after the latter discovers that Soldier Boy is Homelander's father, and deduces that Noir knew all along and never told him.
Even Evil Has Standards:
He.... seems upset by the gruesome death of a whale, provided he wasn't just mocking the Deep's hysteria.
He's also disgusted by Soldier Boy's actions and calls him a "piece of shit" for all the abuse he put Payback through. This loathing of Soldier Boy was great enough to the point that he eagerly agreed to get rid of him when Stan Edgar requested it.
Evil Counterpart: To Kimiko (Although they only met and fought once, in that same instance). Both are the silent brutes of their groups with a lot of blood on their hands, but Black Noir will kill innocent people too, unlike Kimiko. Noir is submissive to Vought, asocial, a quasi-False Friend to Homelander (and one of the few people the supe actually respects) and temporarily ditches the Seven upon Soldier Boy's return. While Kimiko has a rocky relationship with Butcher, she's friendly and loyal to her group, keeps her word to Butcher to complete the mission in Russia, and gets her powers back specifically to better defend the Boys despite hating her abilities. They also have more imaginative, sensitive and down-to-earth sides; both enjoy drawing in their spare time (Buster Beaver in Noir's case, who Noir hallucinates along with other cartoons). Black Noir enjoys sake, boba tea and is a master with the piano. Kimiko enjoys makeup, practices a keyboard at one point, is ecstatic to visit Vought Land (despite being part of the organization she's fighting against), and later imagines a whole musical number sequence at a hospital.
Expy:
He is not just the Batman of the Seven, but also one to Marvel's Deadpool. As they are both horribly scarred, yet extremely durable super-powered assassins with a tenuous grip on reality and a tendency towards hallucinations.
His silent, obscured appearance, terrifying presence in a battle, and altered perception of reality around him through a more child-like lens makes him have multiple similarities to The Pyro.
As a always masked, Implacable Man Silent Antagonist who is a Hyper-Competent Sidekick and seemingly invincible, Noir can be seen as a live action, fleshy version of Soundwave from Transformers: Prime.
The Faceless: His head and face are always completely covered by a black mask.Underneath, he's apparently badly disfigured and suffering old injuries from Payback's betrayal of Soldier Boy at Nicaragua, including having a noticeable gash in his skull caused by the latter's shield. Beforehand, he was fairly good-looking and even considered a career in acting, but afterwards, he's a mangled mess underneath his intimidating appearance.
False Friend: Homelander mistakes Noir's reliability as friendship since Noir has been helping him ever since his first day as a superhero. Noir doesn't particularly care about Homelander and just stays close to Vought's interest. Considering Homelander is secretly the son of Noir's old abuser, Soldier Boy, their superficially close relationship as perceived by outsiders and Homelander himself takes on a level of dark Irony. Although there are hints that Noir did grow to care for Homelander while keeping tabs on him.
Fate Worse than Death: It's revealed in season 3 that as a young man, he was violently disfigured by Soldier Boy, before which he was an outgoing, ambitious young Supe that was looking for a mainstream career. After that, he spent close to four decades as a mute, burnt shell of a man, doomed to play second fiddle to Homelander, and basically cut off from any meaningful contact with anybody except the cartoon characters he hallucinated.
Fatal Flaw: Submissiveness. Black Noir has no agency of his own and will not make any meaningful decisions without permission from an authority figure, such as Stan Edgar or Homelander. This causes him to spend who knows how long being abused by Soldier Boy during his early days, only rebelling when given the green light by Edgar, causing him to lose half his face and some brain matter in their fight. To make matters worse, Homelander mistakes Black Noir's meekness and willingness to do as he's told as loyalty and friendship, so when Black Noir runs away from the Seven to avoid Soldier Boy, and later is exposed as having known about Soldier Boy being Homelander's father, Homelander kills him for his apparent disloyalty. Had Black Noir shown even a little bit of personal initiative, he might have avoided his final fate.
Fights Like a Normal: As a member of the Seven, Black Noir is confirmed to have superpowers, but he doesn't use any onscreen besides the bare minimum superhuman strength and durability needed to fight against the Female.
Foreshadowing:
When offered a candy bar by a Vought employee, he has her throw it away instead. In "Butcher, Baker, Candlestick Maker", it's revealed that he has an allergy to tree nuts.
In the flashback to Mallory's recollection of the mission at Nicaragua, in the aftermath of the attack she stumbles across the badly burned and helmetless Black Noir, apparently caught in an explosion during the attack, with a noticeable gash cut deep into his skull. It's later revealed this wasn't because of the attack by the Russians, but Payback collectively turning on Soldier Boy to give him his due comeuppance, eventually subduing him with nerve gas, but not before he painfully mutilated Black Noir's face on a burning car hood and caved his skull in with his shield, causing him long-lasting brain damage.
Funny Background Event: Quite a few.
In Season 1, a scene at a club shows Noir dancing in the background.
During the movie pitch for Dawn of the Seven, Black Noir is shown to have fallen asleep.
During Vought's PR event, Noir and Homelander are seen distributing blankets. No one takes Noir's blankets and Noir lowers his head in sadness.
Glass Cannon: In relative terms. Black Noir definitely has considerable Super-Toughness, as he can take punches from Kimiko and Starlight and wasn't reduced to giblets by Naqib's explosion. However he seems far more fragile than other high-tier supes, especially to impacts other than blunt force trauma; Naqib's explosion visibly wounded him, as did a smaller one back in Nicaragua, and bullets are shown to penetrate his skin. It seems he actually has use for the armor he wears. Despite all this, he's still more than strong enough to beat nominally tougher supes to a pulp. Homelander disembowels him with a single hit in the final episode of season 3, while he needs many hits to inflict any notable amount of damage on the not-that-much-stronger Maeve and Soldier Boy.
Good Thing You Can Heal: Noir isn't nearly as durable as the likes of Maeve or even Starlight, with even a pistol round at close range going right through his hand. He makes up for this with his Healing Factor and implicit immunity to pain.
Graceful Loser: While Soldier Boy cost him his chance to become a movie star, he doesn't seem too broken up about Eddie Murphy getting the role of Axel Foley, and in fact tries to follow his example.
Guest Fighter: Appears as an Operator in Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II during a limited time event.
Handicapped Badass: Given the revelations about his past in season 3...
Healing Factor: Implied. Noir has been visibly injured several times in the course of the series but seems to bounce back almost instantly, most recently when Hughie shot him in the hand at close range and the bullet went straight through his palm with a visible plume of blood. Not a minute later he's giving Butcher a Neck Lift with the same hand and isn't even bleeding. It's revealed to be quite weak against powerful Supers contrary to Kimiko's, as Soldier Boy permanently crippled him and Homelander outright killed with sheer Super-Strength.
Helmets Are Hardly Heroic: Attempted to invoke this to help further his career. Sadly, it might have helped protect him a little had he chosen to wear it when taking on Soldier Boy, after which, he's all but forced to keep the helmet on permanently, since his actual face looks close to falling off from the injuries.
Hidden Depths:
Shown when he wordlessly glowers at a pianist until he steps away from the piano, then sits down by it himself and plays the Minute Waltz, a much faster and upbeat piece than what the other guy was playing. Also, in a promotional video shot by Vought to showcase the members of the Seven, Black Noir's personal hobby is revealed to be drinking green tea according to the practice of the Japanese tea ceremony - an art with Zen Buddhist undertones.
After the truth behind Compound V is revealed, he's shown watching the news on his phone and apparently quite upset.
Shortly after he assassinates Naqib, he plays with the toy of a child witness to cheer him up.
He puts his hand over his heart when he sees the eviscerated and dying Lucy the whale.
Despite his many quirks, non-verbalism and being the relatively least flashy superhero out of The Seven, The Boys: Diabolical reveals that he was Vought's top-ranked hero before Homelander's debut, is popular to the point where the spotlight is quickly shifted over to him despite Homelander's first impression and is quite acknowledgeable in PR tactics to which he taught Homelander on how to maintain his public image. Season 3 implies that this is because he has a Villainous Friendship with Stan Edgar, who may have helped him with this as compensation for how badly Black Noir was injured in the mission in Nicaragua.
Is revealed to have attempted to make it big as a comedy actor in Beverley Hills Cop. These dreams were ruined due to Soldier Boy spreading false information about Noir to the director.
Going off a comment by his hallucinations when Homelander eviscerates him, he's a member of the Christian faith.
Hidden in Plain Sight: Black Noir, the clad-in all-black superhero whose alias literally means "Black Black" in two different languages, is secretly a black man because black supes polled low in the Deep South when he was introduced.
Highly Visible Ninja: Notably played straight as he is quickly spotted by Butcher on a rooftop, wearing all black in broad daylight. He also sets off every trap the Boys plant on him, destroying an entire living room in the process. However, given his skill in stealth showcased in the rest of the season, it may be that Black Noir simply didn't care about stealth against a group of non-supes and wanted to send a message that they couldn't hurt him.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Homelander sees him as this (even though Noir certainly does not see himself as a sidekick). Noir is the only one that Homelander praises during meetings and although Homelander has shown a disdain for "cripples", he highly respects Noir. When Soldier Boy returns, Homelander says he's glad to have Noir on his side at a time like this (seeing Starlight and Maeve as traitors and A-Train and the Deep as useless). Homelander even says that Noir was worth more than A-Train and the Deep combined.
Immortal Assassin: So far, he's managed to shrug off almost every attempt to stop him and almost invariably manages to kill his target, barring exceptional circumstances. Kimiko survives her apparent death at his hands because of her hitherto undisclosed Healing Factor and Butcher manages to get him off the Boys' backs by blackmailing Edgar with Homelander's rape of Becca. Even Starlight was on the receiving end of a beatdown by him and it is only with Maeve's intervention that she manages to escape.
Implacable Man: He never stops coming, literally walking through all opposition. Given he suffered multiple physical beatings at the hands of Soldier Boy, survived Homelander trying to kill him after a failed mission and even survived a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown from Soldier Boy that would have easily killed a lesser man, albeit not without cost, it's likely simply that there's little else anyone could do to him that he hasn't already endured.
In Name Only: Aside from his superhero codename and aesthetic, Black Noir is a radically different character in the Prime series. While he does play the role of being The Corrupter to Homelander like in the comics, the circumstances are very much unintentional and different as well.
Irony:
When he was younger, Noir hated his silent ninja gimmick and wanted to stop wearing his mask so he could market his face. Said face was horrifically scarred and his vocal cords were destroyed minutes later and he put the mask back on so he could hide his injuries.
His name means "black black," his costume is black, his weapons are black, and everything about him is black. Yet 30 years ago, he couldn't take off his costume and show his skin is black because America was far more racist back then. By the present day when Vought would happily let him take off the mask and cash in on diversity points with the public, it's far too late as his face is too scarred to show off.
As an assassin, Black Noir often killed people from the shadows and had the element of surprise. In a majority of fights against The Boys, he's often defeated by being caught off-guard. When he fought Kimiko, he wasn't expecting her and was unprepared to fight another Supe as he planning to kill Frenchie at the time. He almost killed Butcher, Hughie, and M.M. but had to retreat after Butcher blackmailed Stan Edgar into making him back down. He nearly killed Starlight but was incapacitated after being force-fed an Almond Joy by Maeve to trigger his tree nut allergy. Finally, he was killed by Homelander when the latter put him in a false sense of security and got him to reveal that he knew all along that Soldier Boy was his father.
I Was Quite a Looker: Back in the Eighties, before being permanently scarred by Soldier Boy, Black Noir was a conventionally handsome young black man.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Though rarely shown, Black Noir is one of the few supes who isn't a generally or outright callous individual. He's shown to have a soft spot for children being that he wouldn't dare hurt or kill one and he is overall very cordial albeit silently. He is also shown to care for his teammates in his backstory by all of them agreeing to stand up against Soldier Boy for his abusive behavior towards them.
Knight of Cerebus: Black Noir was the first real threat from The Seven to The Boys: Maeve was never completely on Vought's side so she never fought them directly, Homelander never recognized Butcher as a threat and often played with his prey, A-Train was more concerned about his status in The Seven and avoided The Boys until he was forced to fight them, The Deep only had an advantage when he was in the ocean and Translucent was the first member of The Seven to officially be killed by The Boys after carelessly bragging about his powers (which allowed Hughie to figure out that he was vulnerable to electricity). Unlike A-Train or Homelander, Black Noir was nowhere near as theatrical as he hid in the shadows and silently killed everyone who got in his way. The few times he actually fights the Boys, they are quickly backed into a corner and outmatched until Noir is caught off-guard or forced to retreat. Black Noir fought Kimiko and inflicted heavy damage on her but retreated after leaving her to bleed out. He nearly killed Butcher, Hughie, and M.M. without taking much damage and only backed off when Butcher told Stan Edgar he had incriminating photos of Ryan's existence. Noir nearly killed Starlight but was defeated by Maeve after being caught off-guard and force-fed an Almond Joy. It's also worth noting that in the fight against Noir, Butcher initially chooses to hide with his aunt, Hughie, M.M., and Terror rather than try to taunt Noir or fight him one-on-one.
Laser-Guided Karma: It's more tragic than most examples, but his death is ultimately this. In season 3, he abandoned Homelander during a time when he was most vulnerable and in need of emotional support, despite Homelander genuinely considering him his friend. Homelander ends up paying him back in a way after Black Noir inadvertently presses his Berserk Button by revealing that he knew Soldier Boy was Homelander's father but never told him. And as he had an indirect role in Homelander becoming a violent maniac, he also directly paid the ultimate price for it.
Locked Out of the Loop: He sobs when reacting to the breaking news story about Compound V and the origin of superpowers, implying that he had no idea that his powers came from Compound V.
McNinja: His public persona. An African-American whose abilities and character are centered around East Asian hobbies and aesthetics.
Metafiction: His story arc is a commentary on racially motivated censorship, which was historically very pervasive in superhero media. For instance, Jim Shooter created the Adventure Comics superhero Ferro Lad with the intention for the character to be Black, but the censors didn't allow it. note  Likewise, Chu Hing created the Green Turtle with the intention of making the character Asian. However, the censors refused to allow an unambiguously Asian superhero, so he wrote the comic so the character was always in a mask that obscured his face.note  Just like those characters, Black Noir was told that a Black superhero was bad publicity, and he was thus forced to wear a mask if he wanted to be part of the Seven.
Nightmare Fetishist: The Deep, who is admittedly an Unreliable Narrator, claims that Noir had an erection after slaughtering an Indonesian fishing village.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: He's on the receiving end of this when it's revealed that Soldier Boy brutally assaulted him when he attempted to branch out into doing films. Soldier Boy is also shown to be the one that gave Noir his burn scars and caused his mutism by bashing his brains in.
Noodle Incident: Apparently during the Time Skip between seasons 2 and 3, he did something to a Hard Rock Cafe in Lagos that Robert Singer calls a war crime and which his Imaginary Friend, Buster Beaver, had to comfort him about.
Not His Sled: With the partial reveal of his face in Season 2 that is explored more in a flashback in Season 3, it's confirmed that unlike the comics, this version of Black Noir is not a clone of Homelander.
Not So Stoic: When the news about Compound V breaks out in Season 2, he is shown sitting on the floor in a hallway silently crying.
When Noir finds out that Soldier Boy is alive and coming after him, he immediately decides to flee the Tower and literally rips his tracking chip out from the flesh of his arm. Mind you, this is the same guy that's never been scared of getting hurt or fighting other super-powered people.
Additionally, when he's forced to remember what Soldier Boy did to him, the memories make him visibly flinch and recoil.
Older Than They Look: Well, Noir doesn't really look like anything, however, he moves and fights like he's in the prime of his life. But he'd have to be in his late 50s at the minimum in the present day, making him the oldest of the Seven by at least 20 years. He likely ages differently thanks to Compound V, but it's unknown if he's The Ageless like Soldier Boy and Stormfront, or simply Long-Lived.
Out of Focus: Being faceless and wordless, he gets the least focus of the Seven in Season 1. This ends in season 3, with the return of Soldier Boy and his Revenge against his old team Payback, of which Noir was a primary member, for their betrayal of him in Nicaragua. Noir is not only shown without his helmet and allowed to emote vocally, but his current silent, obscured appearance is revealed to be because of injuries inflicted on him by Soldier Boy's brutal beatdown, with it revealed that Noir suffers various hallucinations and an altered perception of reality underneath the mask.
Professional Killer: While he's publicly shown as a member of the Seven, his true job seems to be as Edgar's personal hitman.
Psychopathic Manchild: It's implied that the injuries he sustained from his beating at the hands of Soldier Boy severely stunted his mental capacity, given that he turns to imaginary friends based on the mascots of his favorite pizza restaurant for comfort.
Punch-Clock Villain: Black Noir is ruthless and will kill whoever his bosses tell him (and whoever gets between him and his target), but unlike the rest of the Supes he's not particularly depraved outside of that. His hobbies (like piano-playing and tea-making) are mundane, he doesn't go out of his way to torture his targets, and he won't kill anyone he doesn't need to (e.g. he spared the child witness his assassination of Naqib). Epitomized in his confrontation with Butcher and the Boys: he goes from ready to disembowel them to walking away without incident (despite them having shot him) the moment that his boss takes them off the hit list. Season 3 reveals that, due to severe brain damage, he may not even possess the moral agency to know that what he's doing is wrong.
Punny Name: Black Noir is a black-skinned man, dressed in black from head to toe.
Put on a Bus: His allergic reaction to the Almond Joy in "Butcher, Baker, Candlestick Maker" puts him out of commission for the last episode. He recovers in the 1 year timeskip between seasons 2 and 3.
Race Lift: Season 2 Episode 7 reveals that Black Noir is a very scarred and burned black man, whereas in the comics, he was a clone of Homelander, who's white and blonde.
The Reliable One: Homelander praises him as this when the rest of the Seven's mishaps begin piling up. In Season 2, Mr. Edgar uses him to clean up the mess that Homelander has created, tracking down super terrorist Naqib and later Billy Butcher.
By the time Season Three rolls around, even throughout his Sanity Slippage, Homelander continues to genuinely praise Black Noir, being the only one of the Seven he doesn't bully or intimidate. He thanks Noir sincerely for having his back... right before Black Noir pulls a Screw This, I'm Outta Here! as soon as they part.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!: The previously reliable Noir rips out his locator and makes a run for it the moment he realizes Soldier Boy is back and Homelander is out of sight. It's subsequently revealed that Soldier Boy is not only arguably the most-dangerous Supe in the world besides Homelander with a grudge against Noir, he also used to physically abuse him when he was a member of Payback and is even the one who permanently disfigured him and gave him brain damage during the Sandinista attack, resulting in Noir's mentality becoming child-like and delusional inside his scrambled mind. Solider Boy is a walking Trauma Button for Noir, making his instant escape extremely justified.
Silent Antagonist: Vought's deadly assassin who never speaks.
Skull for a Head: His helmet evokes this image.
The Speechless: He doesn't talk onscreen because Soldier Boy destroyed his vocal cords.
The Spook: His voice is never heard, he never appears without his mask, and according to official source materials, his height and weight are said to frequently change. Even Homelander doesn't know what he looks like. He was just a regular glory seeking Supe up until Soldier Boy destroyed his face and vocal chords, forcing him to wear his costume all the time to hide his injuries.
Stealth Expert: Takes out an entire terrorist compound by himself without being detected until the end. He later ambushes Starlight in the middle of a lit hallway without her noticing him.
Suddenly Speaking: He appears unmasked and speaking normally in a flashback during Season 3, Episode 3. It's implied that his mysterious persona originally was just a publicity scheme, as Stan Edgar says that "ninjas are popular with boys aged between 7 and 10" when Black Noir demands that he be allowed to ditch the mask. In said flashback, it's implied his vocal chords were destroyed and he endured brain damage, which is why he is unable to speak in the present.
Super-Speed: Billy claims he can outrun a car.
Super-Strength: Rips apart a terrorist's head by tearing off their jaw, hands Kimiko, Starlight, and Maeve their asses on separate occasions, and can easily smash through thick concrete walls and pillars.
Super-Toughness: Deconstructed. He walks away from multiple explosions throughout Season 2. Notably, he isn't even bulletproof; when Hughie shoots him in the hand at a close range the bullet goes straight through with a visible plume of blood, suggesting his toughness comes from a Healing Factor rather than the more conventional kind of durability. Said toughness clearly has its limitations however, as whilst he survived what would have been a fatal beatdown for anybody else at Soldier Boy's hands, it came at the cost of his face, vocal cords, and some of his brain. The deconstruction comes in when surviving that beat-down basically ruined his life, and his super-toughness keeping him alive basically resigned him to a Fate Worse than Death as a living weapon for Vought.
Tap on the Head: Gruesomely so, as this is what really rendered him mute, as Soldier Boy caved his brains in with his shield after attempting to fight back against him for his repeated abuse and only surviving thanks to his Healing Factor. The consequence of such damage left him just barely a functional Manchild who is capable of following orders as the only way to cope with the trauma.
Taught by Experience: His near-death experience at the hands of Soldier Boy really left Black Noir with both the fortitude and experience of going toe-to-toe against another Supe that's far above his weight class. This is best shown in The Boys: Diabolical, where he mainly spent the entire "fight" against an inexperienced Homelander by running away, dodging his attacks and countering them with knives, and eventually outsmarted him.
Team Killer: During his time in Payback he seems to have cut down people on his own side on reflex.
Team Member in the Adaptation: He was a member of Payback before joining the Seven in this continuity.
Terminator Impersonator: He's got a cowl that looks like a skull with black lenses, a muscular build hidden under a black suit, doesn't talk, and is able to withstand some horrific disfigurements without even flinching.
Terror Hero: Publicly lauded as a hero and celebrity, yet intimidates nearly everyone that he encounters.
Through the Eyes of Madness: A scene from his POV shows his thoughts via talking cartoon animals that he sees and interacts with.
Token Competent Minion: When Homelander is berating the other members of The Seven for being careless and incompetent, he takes a moment to tell Noir that he's not a part of this as he's actually been doing great, unlike the others. Throughout the series, it's shown that Homelander genuinely does respect Noir more than the other members of The Seven because of how cunning and competent he is of them and truly sees him as a friend.
Token Minority: Played for Laughs by Homelander, who claims that Black Noir doesn't identify as any race. He briefly gets unmasked in "Butcher, Baker, Candlestick Maker," showing that he is black.
Took a Level in Jerkass: When he was younger, he was a pretty outgoing hero who wanted to make more of a name for himself. Somewhere between his first maiming and the present, he became a totally ruthless and brutal assassin who was willing to cover up Homelander's lethal outing in the field. Getting his acting career ruined, getting the shit beaten out of him by Soldier Boy and/or suffering brutal brain damage may have had something to do with it.
Toxic Friend Influence: It's revealed in Homelander's Origins Episode in The Boys: Diabolical that Black Noir was ultimately responsible for Homelander's Never My Fault personality by covering up Homelander's botched mission in a way that absolved Homelander of all responsibility. This becomes pitch-black ironic with the reveal that Homelander is actually Soldier Boy's son, as Noir's more pragmatic and merciless nature that taught Homelander the wrong lessons when dealing with his mistakes was something that was created because of Noir's abuse and mental damage at Soldier Boy's hands, making it an indirect life lesson from father to son.
Tragic Villain: Frightening and deadly he may be, Black Noir's past and experiences in Nicaragua are bleakly sad. He was simply someone who was excited to be a superhero and part of a team led by Soldier Boy. And then Soldier Boy was a controlling and abusive boss who bullied Earving out of being in a movie and when he and the rest of Payback fought back, Earving received the worst of it, having his brain caved in and left with permanent scars as well as being unable to speak. Suddenly, his silent nature and his abandoning Homelander seem a lot more melancholic than you think. He also seems lonely and desperate for companionship he finds in imaginary cartoons from Buster Beaver's Pizza Restaurant. It's implied the place is of importance to him as he visits it as an adult even after he paralyzed a kid in the exact same place at 9 years old, maybe even because of it.
Troubling Unchildlike Behavior: Apparently paralyzed someone when he was only 9 years old and then hid in a ball pit. Since it is listed off with other events Noir considers to be bad memories (along with a boner in 7th grade and a Hard Rock Cafe massacre), it could have been unintentional.
Two-Faced: The reason why he wears his mask all the time, following a botched military expedition in Nicaragua.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: Flashbacks show Black Noir used to be a fairly talkative guy who simply wanted to be known and acknowledged for his efforts. Although it is mentioned that he paralyzed another kid when he was 9, it is unknown if it was accidental or not. Soldier Boy sabotaging him and then viciously beating him for calling him out hardened him. Then the horrific brain and face injuries he took while getting revenge have left him a hollow shell that can barely even be called human anymore.
Uncertain Doom: After Homelander confronts Noir with the realization that he always knew about his relation to Soldier Boy and never told him for all the years they'd been working together, he punches him in the stomach and rips out a length of his intestines, leaving Noir to bleed out on the floor afterward. Whilst this would be fatal for anybody else, and Homelander afterward talks about him like he considers him dead, Noir's Super-Toughness and implied Healing Factor, not to mention the fact that he managed to survive Soldier Boy violently smashing out part of his brains, leave it ambiguous as to whether or not the damage done was too great for him to recover from. It's eventually revealed that Earving did indeed die according to this article, with an unnamed successor taking up his superhero identity in Season 4.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: As revealed in The Boys: Diabolical, him carrying out Vought's wishes and cleaning up Homelander's botched first mission in a way that absolved Homelander of all responsibility ended up creating the self-serving psychopath who would end up becoming the world's biggest threat.
Villainous Friendship:
Besides Queen Maeve (until season 2), Black Noir is the other member of the Seven who Homelander sees as a genuine friend. This makes sense in Homelander's Origins Episode in The Boys: Diabolical, where it was Black Noir who taught Homelander how to appeal to the public and cover up his failure to save the hostages. However, Season 3 initially appears to have been a False Friend and he didn't care for Homelander as an individual and was only around due to Vought's orders and loyalty to Stan Edgar. Once Soldier Boy came back into the picture, Noir didn't hesitate to make a run for it when Homelander needed his support at the time. However, after he is convinced by his imaginary friends to return and face his fears, he shares a hug with Homelander and cartoon hearts appear, indicating that Noir did grow to care for Homelander while keeping tabs on him.
Season 3 reveals that he is friends with Stan Edgar, having been close enough to his boss that he could speak freely with Edgar regarding issues with his costume. In turn, Edgar was on a real-name basis and honest to Noir about why the outfit was chosen, but avoided being condescending with his reasoning. This closeness remains in the present, as Noir is one of Edgar's Co-Dragons (the other being his adoptive daughter Victoria Neuman).
Weaksauce Weakness: He has a tree nut allergy, so Maeve is able to defeat him by stuffing an Almond Joy down his throat.
The Worf Effect: He handily takes down Kimiko aka The Female, The Big Guy of the Boys, a Wolverine Expy who up until that point had been portrayed as a nearly unstoppable fighter, left her for dead with multiple knife wounds that would have killed her (or perhaps did kill her) if not for her healing factor.
World's Best Warrior: Of all Vought's Supes, Noir is implied to be the single most skilled fighter, which paired with his immense strength makes him probably the second most potent combatant after Homelander. Across the first and second seasons, the only person he doesn't completely steamroll is Maeve in their first fight (who's just under Homelander and Soldier Boy in terms of strength), and even then she only beats him by exploiting his Weaksauce Weakness. However, he later succeeds in kidnapping her on Homelander's orders. While he was incapable of really damaging the guy, he also managed to survive his first fight with Homelander through skillful use of the environment and his agility. In his backstory, he proved absolutely no match for Soldier Boy in a fight but was also the only member of Payback to hurt him at all (bloodying his mouth with some punches). Mindstorm and Crimson Countess were only able to faze him through telepathy and poison gas, respectively, while he seemed to just no-sell blows from them and the TNT twins. It also helps that he has no issue stealthily assassinating someone or using a weapon like poison gas on them.
Wicked Cultured: He's shown making Japanese-style tea and playing the piano.
Would Hit a Girl: While clearing out the building where Naqib is, he slices open a woman's throat without a moment's hesitation. He also has no qualms about beating and apprehending Starlight when she turns against them, or gutting Kimiko down.
Would Not Hurt A Child: In Naqib's compound, he uses a stuffed animal to entertain a child despite the kid being a witness to his crimes.
You Don't Look Like You: On the surface, Black Noir's aesthetic is similar to his comic counterpart, except underneath that mask is a heavily scarred black man instead of an identical clone of the white Homelander.
Your Size May Vary: His character profile lists his height and weight as "unknown" and for some reason frequently changes.