Abusive Parents: His dad kidnapped him as a young boy and was physically abusive, putting out cigarettes on his body. Frenchie also claims his father once tried to smother Frenchie with a Hello Kitty duvet when Frenchie was only 10.
The Ace: Frenchie is talented at many kinds of criminal skills, whether it's producing drugs, smuggling weapons, breaking and entering, or lying to authorities. He's so good at the latter that he pretty flawlessly fools Homelander, who is a Living Lie Detector due to his Super-Senses.
Amazon Chaser: His taste in women seems to tend toward the violent.
Ambiguously Bi: He had a girlfriend/fling named Cherie, plenty of Ship Tease with Kimiko, has kissed Hughie on the lips when he and Starlight expose the truth about Compound V and in flashbacks of Season 2 of episode 6, he seemed to be as close to fallen friend Jay as he is to Cherie, and asked MM how he felt about transgender strippers for his bachelor party. When MM is horrified about almost being strangled to death by a giant penis, Frenchie's half-joking answer is for him "not to be so close-minded". As of Season 4, it's no longer ambiguous, as the first episode shows him in a relationship with a man named Colin.
Ambiguously Trained: His exact background beyond his criminal career isn't known, yet he has enough knowledge to rig improvised weapons and tools, run arms deals, execute disarming techniques, and even formulate Novichok. It's difficult to say he learned any of this before or after he was recruited as a hitman for The Mafiya. The green and tan field jackets he often wears could either be a simple fashion choice or further suggest experience.
Colin: Okay. So, how does a chemist know how to disarm a guy like Jason fսcking Bourne?
Frenchie: I'd say more like Jean Reno in Léon.
Armor-Piercing Question: When he and MM debate about the benefits of the marriage, he asks MM that if marriage is so pure, why is he lying so much to his wife about his real job. MM doesn't answer the question.
Arms Dealer: Presumably a mix of the "Gangland Gun Runner" and "International Arms Merchant". He states he is a gunrunner for his trade; coming up with ways to fight supes is something he does in his downtime.
The Atoner: One of his conversations with Hughie implies that he feels quite guilty about his past as a hitman. He later tells Mother’s Milk that he feels Kimiko makes him a better person, implying this is part of his motivation for helping her.
Boxed Crook: He was recruited from the police station after being arrested for a failed bank robbery. In a variant, his answer was refusal, but agreed when Mallory told him his accomplices would be spared as well.
The Casanova:
He claims to sleep with someone different every night when he's not busy being on the run. Considering that he brings this up with an argument with M.M., he could just be trying to get under the latter's skin.
He's also devastated he didn't get to witness (or possibly participate in) Herogasm, and nearly everyone comments "Frenchie would be loving this."
Christianity Is Catholic: He is revealed to be catholic like Annie in season 4, and he seems pretty serious about believing the theology of Christianity.
Clandestine Chemist: Used his extensive knowledge in chemistry to back his criminal career prior to joining The Boys. It was usually to address the powers of supes instead of getting into the drug trade, but he still had the attitude down pat. Since The Boys have a more official government-backed position by Season 3, the "clandestine" part might not really apply anymore.
Cloudcuckoolander: There's something very off about Frenchie, from his frighteningly lethal skillset to his attempts to befriend Hughie by telling him horrifying stories from his childhood.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: And yet, he serves as this temporarily to Kimiko as she learns to readjust to life outside of a cage, which is essentially like trying to control a feral child.
Commonality Connection: He has a moment of bonding with Annie over being catholic and the hardships of holding into your fate. Frenchie believes in everything except for the Sacrament of Penance because he thinks he is not worth of being forgiven because of his past crimes. Annie tells him he should talk to someone and suggests Kimiko.
Crazy-Prepared: He's got at least 34 addresses and 12 aliases, and at least one location rigged to "burn" (read: explode in a way to erase all evidence) at a moment's notice. Just in case.
Every Scar Has a Story: Little Nina tried to humiliate Frenchie in front of Kimiko by exposing his scars in a way that is supposed to cause pain. Nina frames the stories of his scars as consequences of his actions, not because of what he's endured but because of what he's done and who he is.
Functional Addict: He's constantly seen consuming all manner of drugs casually, which doesn't seem to affect his wits.
Hero of Another Story: He was robbing banks and defeating Supes with just his friends, his wits, and his drugs long before Mallory brought him on the team.
Hidden Depths:
Among his arsenal of less-than-savoury skills, he is also well-versed in French cuisine.
He also quotes by heart philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre on the third episode of the fourth season, indicating he might be more well-read than one would assume.
In-Series Nickname: Only ever called "Frenchie" by The Boys and their associates. Those who have known him for longer call him "Serge", which is revealed to be short for "Sergei" by Little Nina.
Jack of All Trades: As Hughie mentions, he functions as a gunrunner, chemist, interrogator, engineer, and door-kicker as needed. Frenchie himself claims to know "a little about a lot."
Just Friends: Frenchie and Kimiko are just friends. In Season 2 he does try to kiss her while high on cocaine but Kimiko immediately rejects him and Frenchie is remorseful for crossing her boundaries. But in Season 3, Kimiko is the one kissing Frenchie, blurring the lines. Season 4 initially has Kimiko confess to Frenchie but then say they can't be together so he should be happy with someone else he's interested in, but the season ends with the two of them admitting their feelings for one another and sharing a Big Damn Kiss.
Mad Scientist: Frenchie has a knack for chemistry and engineering to rig weapons and traps that can incapacitate supes, in addition to some level of understanding of human biology. Place him in a lab and his inventions can range from an all-purpose knockout bomb to a deadly nerve agent.
Tasked with finding a way to take out Translucent for good (just in case), he realizes that a protected outside might leave a normal and vulnerable inside. Frenchie knocks the supe out with extra voltage and shoves C4 up Transluscent's rectal cavity.
Season 2 reveals he once came up with a Xanax-spreading RPG against a superhero whose powers align with his rage. He tried to replicate this success against Stormfront with EMP-backed RPG's, but things don't go to plan there.
Master of Unlocking: With the right tools, he can pick any lock.
Maurice Chevalier Accent: He speaks English with a very noticeable French accent, and sprinkles his phrases with French words.
Nationality as Alias: He's French, and he's nicknamed "Frenchie".
Nice Guy: Kookiness and criminal background aside, Frenchie is a friendly and supportive guy.
Noodle Incident: Frenchie was supposed to tail Lamplighter and keep track of his location one night, but he didn't and Lamplighter ended up burning Mallory's grandchildren. Marvin blames Frenchie for whatever happened that night but Frenchie maintains his innocence, and the two have remained on bad terms ever since.
Season 2, Episode 6 reveals what happened. Frenchie was supposed to tail Lamplighter but got a call that his friend was overdosing; Frenchie ran to save him, and did not catch up to Lamplighter, who was attempting to assassinate Mallory and mistakenly killed her grandchildren. Marvin immediately asks Frenchie why he never revealed what happened.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Season 2, Episode 6 reveals his real name is Serge. It's worth noting that his nationality might not actually be known. In the comics, it's never confirmed but strongly implied Frenchie is British and his accent and entire persona is... not exactly faked, but isn't real, either. The show is playing with this by casting an Israeli actor in the role, especially as his accent and pronunciation occasionally slip, which could just be the actor, or could be very much in character.
Ooh, Me Accent's Slipping: In the first flashback in Season 2 Episode 6, he falls out of his accent a couple of times, and mentions living off the streets of New York.
Order Versus Chaos: He is chaotic, impulsive, and follows his gut. This puts him into constant conflict with M.M. who likes it when everything is orderly and everyone sticks to the plan (to which Frenchie seems allergic).
Please Kill Me If It Satisfies You: After revealing to Colin that he was the one who murdered his family, Colin delivers a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown and nearly strangles Frenchie to death, which Frenchie urges him to do. Ultimately, however, Colin stops and leaves in disgust, threatening to actually kill Frenchie if he sees him again.
Pop-Cultured Badass: The most destruction-capable member of The Boys who references all kinds of media to get his points across.
Promoted to Love Interest: In the comics he and The Female (Kimiko) were Platonic Life-Partners with a bit of Parental Substitute thrown in, as of the season 4 finale they are an official couple.
Real Men Can Cook: Amusingly, one of the French stereotypes he does exhibit is mastery of baking pastries in episode 7. He's good enough to coach Kimiko.
Real Men Wear Pink: Season 2 reveals that he's a big fan of The Golden Girls, claiming that he learned quite a bit of his attitude from the show.
Recruiting the Criminal: Frenchie is not only the one member of the original Boys that had a criminal background, but also the only one that wasn't career military before joining. Deconstructed, as the resulting tendency to disregard orders occasionally gets the Boys into hot water and gives Lamplighter an opening to cause the deaths of Mallory's grandkids.
Ship Tease: A lot of it with Kimiko throughout the series. While they remain Just Friends, it keeps the door open for a potential Relationship Upgrade. It finally happens in Season 4.
The Smart Guy: He's the most intelligent member of the group, with the widest skillset. He was specifically recruited for his knack for coming up with ways to counter supes's abilities.
The Spook: Nobody knows who this guy really is. Even Vought's crime analytics department can't figure out his true identity, and basically refer to him as "that man."
The Stoner: Is a master drug cook and psychedelics enthusiast. When Hughie is freaking out about keeping Translucent as a prisoner, Frenchie offers him an LSD/MDMA cocktail to calm his nerves.
Supreme Chef: He's noted by many characters to be a phenomenal chef with a talent for French cuisine.
Taught by Television: He formed his life lessons from watching The Golden Girls and he makes many analogies and comparisons from pop culture to get his points across.
These Hands Have Killed: Frenche is wracked with guilt that he killed Colin's family. He spends all of S4 E5 lamenting that he never received any comeuppance for his crimes. By the end of the episode he walks right into a police station and confesses to murder.
Trauma Button: Seeing Lamplighter over the camera in Sage Grove immediately sends him into a murderous rage.
Voice for the Voiceless: Once he and Kimiko become close, he's able to read her gestures and expressions in order to translate to the group what she is thinking or trying to communicate.
Wearing a Flag on Your Head: He has a laptop with a large image of the flag of France covering its top. Of course, whether he is actually French is open to question.
We Used to Be Friends: Season 2 shows that, prior to the Lamplighter fiasco, MM and Frenchie were very close, to the point it's even implied Serge would be best man at Marvin's wedding. Making it much Harsher in Hindsight that the two come to blows almost immediately when they reunite in Season 1.
Why Don't You Just Shoot Him?: He thinks Wile E. Coyote using all sorts of whacky schemes to hunt the Road Runner is a waste when it would have just been easier to shoot him. This is after the failed Compound V hearing against Vought, where the Boys start arming themselves to assassinate The Seven. Hughie and Annie try to convince them that it won't address the root causes and Vought will only make stronger supes in response, so Frenchie turns down the idea by using the cartoon as an analogy.
Frenchie: Always chases Road Runner, always with an elaborate plan, always fails. You know, I always say, "Why do this, Coyote? All you need is an AR-15, and 'meep meep' no more."
Butcher: Exactly! See, we're just gonna shoot Road Runner in the fucking head.