Accidental Adultery: In Season 4, Hughie accidentally cheats on Annie for entire 10 days with a shapeshifter who stole her identity.
Accuser of the Brethren: Becomes this for the first part of the second season, being the only one not trusting Billy after his return. He changes his mind when Billy makes a huge sacrifice to save Hughie's life.
Action Survivor: He's a normal tech guy whose life got turned upside down by Supes. Now he fights back against those powerful beings with the Boys.
Actor Allusion: Hughie putting on Webweaver's costume for a disguise harkens to Jack Quaid voicing Earth-65B Peter Parker / The Lizard in Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse.
All for Nothing: Lampshaded by himself even. After discovering that Neuman was working for Vought the entire time- essentially only going after small-time heroes to create the illusion of progress while still allowing the big timers to perpetuate the system- Hughie laments that he wasted an entire year working for her.
Alternate Company Equivalent: He can be seen as The Boys (2019) version of Spider-Man, but more specifically, Peter Parker. Similarly to most versions of Peter, Hughie is a tech nerd who grew up with troubled pasts, admires superheroes, and has his entire world changed once a loved one is killed by a criminal. Hughie's Love Interest is a blonde woman who also happens to be his Second Love after Robin's death by a supervillain (in Hughie's case, a corrupt Supe). Said love interest also works as an actress too. Then, when Hughie's Drunk on the Dark Side after gaining superpowers for the first time by taking Temp-V, is not too dissimilar to Peter's initial reaction upon getting his own powers. To make the similarities more apparent, Hughie even disguised himself in Webweaver's costume in Season 4, who the latter happens to be a Spider-Man Send-Up. Tellingly, Jack Quaid also voices a corrupted variant of Peter Parker in Spider-Man: Across the Spider-Verse.
Amazon Chaser: A turning point in his first date with Starlight comes when he tells her to stop pretending she's worse than him at bowling, and to stop trying to soft-pedal the fact that she can trivially outclass him physically. When she starts fully acknowledging her strength (and bowling skill, immediately bowling a strike) and asks if it bothers him that she could easily bench-press him, he seems more turned on than anything else.
In Season 3 Hughie eventually tells Starlight that he does in fact feel emasculated by her. It's worth noting that he was using V at the time - which is implied to be corrupting him - so his actual intent isn't 100% clear.
Besides this, he also shows signs of having some kind of attachment disorder, most likely due to both his mother abandoning him and Robin’s death. Butcher points out how he tends to cling to people, and Starlight even questions why he is so forgiving of her and of Butcher in situations where he has every right to give up on them. He just says that he never would. In the season 2 finale, he acknowledges how unhealthy this is and starts making efforts to stand on his own.
Ambiguous Situation: It's ultimately left ambiguous whether Hughie's change in behavior while on Temp V is a result of the drug itself, being Drunk with Power, or somewhere in between.
Apologetic Attacker: When forced to shoot someone in self-defense he screams “Sorry! I’m sorry!” Also, when he first uses Temp V and teleports over to a Russian soldier, he immediately apologizes to him after punching through his chest.
Attempted Rape: Hughie disguises himself as Webweaver at Tek Knight's party and ends up in a situation where he has to perform sexual acts to keep the appearances. At first, Tek and Ashley have no idea that what they do is actually sexual assault, fully believing what they do is consensual. Ashley leaves not knowing of Hughie, but Tek Knight discovers him and proceeds to torture and rape him for real. He prepares himself to perform holes all over Hughie's body and shove his dick in them. Good thing Annie and Kimiko interfere before anything could happen and save his life.
Audience Surrogate: Hughie is the audience POV character for entering the world of the series.
The Baby of the Bunch: He is the youngest member of the Boys and the least prepared. And despite being an adult, Hughie is called "kid" by Butcher and M.M. all the time and is even treated as such. Season 3 shows that he's aware of this and resents it.
Bed Trick: Poor Hughie just can't get a break in season 4 from getting assaulted. He thinks he is having enjoyable sex with his beloved Annie, only to turn out Annie was kidnapped and the shapeshifter assumed her identity, throwing out of the window any form of consent from Hughie.
Berserk Button: Demeaning him for his youthful looks by calling him a kid or a lad really gets under his skin. Tellingly, Translucent patronising Hughie tilts him enough to detonate the bomb in the invisible superhero's arsehole. His father babying him his entire life seems to be the root cause of it. Threatening and or insulting his friends and family is also a good way to get on his bad side.
Beware the Nice Ones: Hughie is a gentle and sensitive soul, but he can be scary when pushed far enough.
After appearing to let Translucent go, Hughie goes on detonate the bomb that was shoved up into Translucent's anus.
He manages to be intimidating enough to blackmail Ezekiel even though the evidence was destroyed.
When A-Train takes Hughie's dad hostage, Hughie walks into the trap and distracts him with Compound V long enough for Kimiko to get the drop on him. He also punches A-Train at Herogasm despite his sincere apology for accidentally killing Robin.
With Annie's help, he exposes the existence of Compound V, which causes more damage to Vought than any of the Boys' actions to date.
After Butcher punches him for interfering with his plan to get Becca back, Hughie punches him back in the face later when he tries to apologize.
When Homelander asks if Starlight is "a good fuck", he actually gets in Homelander's face. Even Homelander is slightly taken aback by this.
When he's dosed with V24, he not only gets the prerequisite Super-Strength and endurance, he gains teleportation powers. When Butcher and Hughie team up with Soldier Boy to take on Homelander, the latter can't even touch him in a straight fight, and Hughie has no issue helping pin him down.
Blood-Splattered Innocents: Happens to him twice in the first two episodes, first when A-Train pulverizes Robin right in front of him, marking his loss of innocence, and second when he blows up Transluscent, marking his transition into a hardened killer. In Season 2 when he gets rammed inside a whale and covered in its guts, he just shuts down completely and has to be coaxed into running for his life.
Break the Cutie:
He was just a nerdy average guy until A-Train killed his girlfriend in front of his eyes, which left him traumatized.
After being forced to be the one to put his father down and being almost tortured and raped by Tek Knight, Hughie breaks down in tears in front of Annie, telling her he is not well after all those traumatic events.
Broken Pedestal:
Toward A-Train. As it turns out, Hughie was a massive fanboy. Then A-Train casually ran through Robin and never even fully acknowledged the fact. Then he personally belittled Hughie, openly mocking the irony of facing a fanboy. There is a chance Hughie might have taken Robin's death differently had it not been caused by his personal idol.
In Season 3, he becomes the Broken Pedestal to M.M. and Annie for taking V-24, when he was supposed to be the Morality Pet for everyone. The pedestal Annie put him on breaks even further when he stops her from trying to stop Soldier Boy from killing the TNT Twins and then tells her that it does actually bother him that she is so much stronger than him. Takes steps towards being a Rebuilt Pedestal with his actions in the finale.
Season 4 establishes that his favorite superhero as a kid was Tek Knight. Which just makes what he goes through in "Dirty Business" sting even harder in that it's performed by his childhood icon.
Call to Adventure: A darker take on the trope. Butcher is the one who introduces Hughie, a Loser Protagonist, into the mad war between psychotic supes and crazy vigilantes.
Butcher: This is your only one and only, mate. Once I go, I'm gone. I am offering you the opportunity to get them that got your girl. What have you got to lose, that you ain't already lost?
Celebrity Paradox: He references The Hunger Games in Season 2. His actor played Marvel, a tribute in its first two films.
Chick Magnet: Downplayed. Besides dating Robin and Starlight, he noticeably catches the attention of Cherie, who admires and touches his face when seeing him for the first time. Maeve also makes odd sexual comments about Hughie when she's introduced to him by Starlight (although this was said in a snarky tone). A woman at Herogasm also perks up when he teleports in completely nude.
Combo Platter Powers: V-24 grants Hughie teleportation, Super Strength and a Healing Factor.
Coming of Age Story: The late bloomer variety. Hughie is mentally a child as he's still treated like one, holds onto his childhood with both hands, and is shown to be living a stagnant lifestyle while with his girlfriend, Robin, who had to ask him out on a first date because he never took the initiative to do so. After Robin is killed, Hughie's mundane life is pulled from under his feet and he tumbles down to adulthood when he experiences injustice for the first time when A-Train doesn't get any punishment for Robin's death and Hughie realizes that his own father can't provide the closure he's looking for. When Hughie kills Translucent, it signifies the loss of his innocence. But it doesn't make him feel like an adult, instead leaving him with severe PTSD that only gets worse in season 2. His relationship with Annie has him slowly growing more mature as he starts taking the initiative and shedding his naivete while still maintaining his optimistic determination.
Commonality Connection:
With Annie, both had their lives turned upside down by Supes (A-Train for Hughie and The Deep for Annie), both were the played the role of being the Naive Newcomer recruited in a disfunction team, both are nice mild-mannered people who play the role of The Heart in their respective teams, and even got same tastes in music. No wonder they fell for each other immediately.
Due to him Taking A Level In Cynic in Season 3, he's the only one in the group to see past Butcher's Jerkass Façade and see his intentions behind things like accusing Ryan of causing Becca's death to keep him from getting involved, whereas the others seem quick to assume it's just Butcher being Butcher, albeit to a greater degree. While Butcher seems appreciative, he has clear reservations with Hughie wanting to take V24 and doing so behind his back.
Conditioned to Accept Horror: And that's not something he is proud of. As Hughie points out, he doesn't even bother whenever he gets showered in someone else's blood, showing how messed up life became to him.
Cosmic Plaything: During the second half of season 4, it really starts to feel like the whole universe is out to get Hughie. First his attempts to save his father from brain death backfire horribly when the compound V makes him accidentally kill multiple innocent people, forcing Hughie to put his own father down for his own sake. One episode later, he's raped by Tek Knightnote  and Ashley, and is noticeably traumatized afterwards. Then when it looks like he's finally caught a break, he gets raped again (this time through deception) by the Supe Shifter. To rub salt on that wound, Annie blames him for that last one.
Cover Identity Anomaly: Hughie attempts an undercover mission, masquerading as Webweaver to infiltrate a gathering hosted by Tek Knight. His objective is to gather intel on Tek Knight's plans with the enigmatic Sister Sage. However, the situation takes a turn for the worse due nobody expecting Webweaver to be a sexual deviant. Hughie is unaware of the latter's unconventional sexual preferences and this creates a deeply uncomfortable situation for him. To keep the act going, Hughie performs embarrassing sexual acts and endures BDSM torture from Ashley who is unware of Hughie. Naturally, his disguise is blown in the end by Tek Knight who sees through his disguise and decides to torture and assault Hughie for real.
Death Seeker: What Hughie temporarily becomes after Butcher kills Lucy and the Boys are forced to flee into the sewers. He’s completely numb to the possibility of dying at the hands of the Seven. When Homelander sees him and threatens to kill both Hughie and Annie, if the latter doesn’t kill Hughie first, Hughie outright (albeit wordlessly) tells her to kill him. It’s Hughie's look of relief at that moment that sells it.
Deliberate Injury Gambit: In order to continue working with the Boys without arousing Neuman's suspicion about his absence from work, he has Kimiko break his arm to give him a more legitimate reason for not showing up than being sick.
Die, Chair, Die!: Hughie has a moment of weakness where he trashes his room after killing Translucent.
Drunk on the Dark Side: Hughie is initially okay with Annie being a Supe and was capable of holding his own but once he starts taking V-24 and using his own power of teleportation, he begins to feel insecure about himself and resents how he's always the one in need of saving as Annie and the Boys have to pull him out of danger. The fact that he's constantly around Soldier Boy, a hypermasculine sociopath with an obsession with having sex with women and using penises as a metaphor, and Billy Butcher, a tough guy who refuses to show any form of vulnerability, mean Hughie starts taking influence from them.
Embarrassing Cover-Up: Another Running Gag around Hughie is that he's actually shockingly good at improvising lies and manipulations- but only so long as they are personally humiliating to him.
While interrogating Ezekiel, his plan to blackmail the Supe with a video of him fucking two men falls through when his phone is destroyed. In seconds, he manages to come up with the idea that Ezekiel fucked him instead.
While attempting to gather intel on Red River, a social worker recognizes him as Starlight's boyfriend. He claims that they're covertly looking for a child, but that his sperm are "like, really, really bad, like a bunch of fat, dead tadpoles."
While floundering in the face of Victoria Neuman's awkward questions, Annie shows up to save him- with a story about how they had a big, public argument. The two of them proceed to get into an actual lovers' spat, causing Victoria to back off, clearly embarrassed.
Even the Guys Want Him: Frenchie kissed his lips after he and Annie exposed the truth about Compound V to the public. Later on, a man at Herogasm asks Hughie if he would like to participate in an act involving his anus, to which he politely declines.
Extreme Doormat: He is repeatedly called out for being one in Episode 1. By Robin, who had to ask him out on a first date, by his father, and by Butcher. This changes with time.
Foil:
To Billy. Both Hughie and Billy are set on the path of revenge because they lost the women they loved to a superhero, and Billy seems to view Hughie as a younger, more naïve version of himself in a way. However, the big difference between them is that Hughie eventually comes to realize that getting revenge on A-Train won't bring Robin back or solve any of his problems and he needs to move forward with his life, whilst Billy is still completely devoted to taking down the supes to the point that it's consumed him. Ironically, the two end up inverting their previous dynamic come Season 3 — due to trying to be a father figure to Ryan, Butcher has mellowed out and become less willing to cross lines to take down Supes, while Hughie becomes more willing to engage in questionable tactics after learning that Victoria Neuman, his boss, is a Supe, meaning that his efforts to police Supes legitimately while working under her were All for Nothing.
To A-Train. Hughie is a working-class tech store salesman, while A-Train is a famous super-athlete. Both men have killed people, but while A-Train put the blame on his victim to rationalize his kill (presumably because this is something he's likely to do again), Hughie came to terms with what he did and avoids killing anyone else. Both also have super girlfriends, but while A-Train hides his relationship with Popclaw out of cowardice and yields to Vought’s demands about their love, Hughie isn't the least bit ashamed of dating Starlight and furiously goes against Butcher for threatening her. Also, while both have had moments of impairment due to being high on Compound V/V-24, Hughie retains better control of his faculties, and while Hughie does punch A-Train while the latter is offering a sincere apology for Robin's death, Hughie is still cognizant despite the high and refuses to go any further than a punch. Hughie's teleportation ability also makes him essentially an upgraded version of A-Train's speedster gimmick. Additionally, while A-Train is a complete kiss-up to Homelander, Hughie will challenge Butcher when the latter goes too far. Tellingly, A-Train later becomes a Butt-Monkey for Homelander while Hughie is Butcher's Morality Pet.
To Homelander. Hughie is physically the least formidable of the Boys, Homelander is the most powerful member of the Seven. Homelander is mentally unstable and overcompensates for his insecurities with a God Complex; Hughie is insecure about his lack of physical abilities but remains humble and is very mentally resilient. Homelander is very charismatic, Hughie is socially awkward (though he becomes less awkward as the series goes on). Homelander is a selfish and violent psychopath who doesn't care who he hurts; Hughie is a compassionate and gentle soul that hates hurting people and feels immense guilt when he does, but will sacrifice himself to save his friends if need be. Both also have childlike qualities to them despite being adult men but Hughie's immature traits are simply an aversion to change, being overly submissive and insecure, flaws he honestly tries to work past and his friends and Starlight encourage him to do so. Homelander's flaws are his petty sadism and ego and he has no intention of ever changing and terrifies others into enabling his worst impulses. Both also yearn for a mother that was absent during their childhood.
Forgiven, but Not Forgotten: While they're able to make up and even team up to expose Compound V to the public to get at Vought, Starlight hasn't completely forgiven him for lying to her about her involvement with The Boys and killing Translucent, and has a tendency to sneak in jabs at him for it.
Freak Out: He's prone to anxiety attacks.
From Nobody to Nightmare: To Vought. He was just an IT guy working a deadend job and they thought they could just buy him off like they do everyone else their "Heroes" hurt. They were wrong.
Fun T-Shirt: Prone to wearing band t-shirts, such as those of Van Halen and The Ramones.
Geek Physiques: His tall, somewhat gangly appearance goes hand-in-hand with his meek nature.
Gentle Giant: Hughie's a Nice Guy who's shown to be the tallest member of The Boys and even makes Homelander look small by comparison.
Got Over Rape Instantly: Hughie displays no long term trauma over being molested and tortured by Tek Knight. He and Annie instantly resume their regular intimacy as if nothing happened. And then it turns out Annie had been replaced by a shapeshifter who took her appearance.
Guile Hero: Hughie's biggest asset is his brain, as a Non-Action Guy, he is better at coming up with plans. In Season 1, he intentionally gets himself caught by Vought to save Kimiko, MM, and Frenchie who are imprisoned, and he did it by hiding a picklock inside his braces. He knew that Frenchie can open everything even with an impromptu picklock.
The Heart: Hughie is the team's most idealistic and naïve member who's able to inspire others and even make Butcher have second thoughts about his more heinous actions.
Heroic BSoD:
He is quite shocked at himself after killing Translucent and all he does is stare at the blood in the tub while washing himself.
Frenchie: You are, perhaps... in a state of shock, mon ami.
Suffers one after Butcher drives the speedboat into Lucy the whale, with Hughie becoming semi-catatonic and almost unresponsive to the team, even being okay with Homelander nearly forcing Starlight to kill him.
Hidden Depths:
At the very beginning of the series he seems like just a meek, below average guy. Even his own father thinks he doesn't have it in him to fight a Goliath like Vought. Turns out he was masking a temper and a steel backbone just waiting to be triggered.
"Herogasm" reveals that he absolutely hates being the one who needs to be saved due to his lack of powers or combat skills and that he took V-24 because he wanted to be stronger. He also apparently has a lot of repressed rage after years of being bullied as a kid.
Hypocrite: Hughie is a man who intentionally participates in murder or torture with the intention of getting to A-Train who, while completely flippant about the affair, didn’t mean to kill Robin. To his credit, Hughie realizes the contradiction between his values and actions, and decides to not to go down the path of vengeance like Billy.
I Can't Believe a Guy Like You Would Notice Me: He knows full well that a celebrity superhero like Starlight is way out of his league. When Homelander pressures Starlight into being his onscreen girlfriend, Hughie is understandably agitated by the influx of memes calling him a cuck.
In Love with the Mark: His initial interactions with Starlight are before he knows she's the new member of the Seven, but once he finds out who she is, he agrees to exploit his connection with her to help the Boys gain information to use. Despite this, he is reluctant to abuse her trust and develops genuine feelings for her.
Insecure Love Interest: While he and Starlight are enjoying a happy relationship in Season 3, it's evident that he's slightly insecure about how much more capable she is compared to him and that her ex-boyfriend, who's applying to join The Seven and therefore in close proximity of her, is a former boy band star on top of being a superhero. This gets worse when he learns that Neuman's the Head Popper, as it fuels his sense of inferiority due to the belief that he fucked up by not noticing sooner and that, unlike Starlight's attempts at internal reform and saving lives, his work was effectively All for Nothing. "Herogasm" also reveals that he hates how he constantly needs to be saved and is bothered by Annie being stronger than him due to her powers.
Karmic Jackpot:
Hughie would choose to save A-Train's life in the Season 1 finale, who would later return the favor in Season 2 by helping him expose Stormfront's past as a Nazi, thus destroying her reputation and giving Hughie and the Boys a win against Vought.
In Season 4 Hughie chooses not to confront A-Train for information right after he went through some family drama. A-Train ends up giving them the intel they needed out of graditude.
The Lancer: Delves fully into this role in Season 2 when he finds himself in the position of being the only one questioning what Butcher is up to.
Let's Get Dangerous!: Considering that he's pretty unremarkable as a person and is the only member of the titular team that has no special training or experience in the field of wetwork, he's surprisingly competent and an unexpected threat against the Seven. He's also the only member of the Boys who has killed a member of the Seven.
Living Emotional Crutch: To Butcher. Butcher struggles with a large amount of self-hatred that outright turns to Death Seeker tendencies a few times. Hughie's support of Butcher and his resemblance to Butcher's late brother eventually led to Butcher going out of his way to keep Hughie safe. The resemblance to Lenny (Billy's brother) in particular makes Butcher view him as Replacement Goldfish for Lenny.
Loser Protagonist: Fully deconstructed in Season 3. After being constantly seen as the scrawny guy, Hughie couldn't handle anymore the idea of being a regular person in a world of supes, until he was finally given a dose of Temp-V. Of course, he enjoys feeling powerful and manly. But this means also taking a few amoral decisions which nearly destroy his relationship with Annie.
AM/FM Characterization: His love of Billy Joel and other old, white pop singers shows his dorky nature and comes from his mother who walked out on him and his father in his childhood.
Missing Mom: Hughie's mother doesn't appear to be in the picture, given his dad's prominent presence. Late in Season 2, it’s revealed that she left when Hughie was six years old.
Mission Control: Subverted. He initially thinks he's going to help the team this way due to his tech skills, but Butcher gives him espionage missions, much to Hughie's fear and dismay.
Morality Pet: As much as Butcher hates to admit it, Hughie is this to him, and to a greater extent stops the team from going too far. Becca and Judy remark how much Hughie reminds them of Lenny, Butcher's younger brother who ended up taking his own life.
Motifs: Infancy and childhood. Hughie is still treated like a child by his father and by his friends. His dad calls a pediatrician so Hughie can take grief counselling, it's a poster of a baby that pushes him to kill a Supe for the first time, and Annie states that Hughie still uses children's shampoo. It's implied he's attached to this motif because of his Missing Mom who left when he was six, and that he holds onto people and certain beliefs out of fear.
Mr. Fanservice: He's good looking, and the first time he teleports and ends up naked comes along with a lingering shot of his ass.
My God, What Have I Done?: Hughie has this reaction upon discovering that Translucent has a son and he left the boy fatherless.
Naked People Are Funny: Hughie's superpower turns out to be teleportation, but it only works on living organisms. Every time he uses his power Hughie ends up naked. As does anyone who he teleports with him.
Nice Guy: Aside from his rage against A-Train getting away with killing Robin, Hughie doesn't seem to hold any bitterness towards supes. He plays the good cop when they capture Translucent and resuscitates A-Train when his heart stops. He is also one of the first people to show real kindness to Annie and treat her as a person rather than a prop. His kind nature is what gets Victoria Neuman to contact him when she sees no way out of her predicament, as she trusts Hughie to help her and her daughter despite the recent bad blood between them. Hughie proves her right when he agrees to help her and it would have gone just fine... until Butcher shows up and is no longer quite himself...
No Guy Wants an Amazon: Zig Zagged. In Season 1, he tells Annie to stop pretending she's bad at bowling (she doesn't want to show him up precisely because she believes in this trope), and she's relieved that he's not threatened by her physical superiority to him. However, Season 3 reveals that Hughie is bothered by how much stronger she is than him - as in, strong enough to easily lift cars and break stone walls. This is one of several factors that lead him to take Temp V, and when he reveals this to Starlight, it forms a wedge between them.
Non-Action Guy: He is the only major character with no special ability or fighting skills. Downplayed by the fourth season, as he's shown winning in a fight with an agent and killing him with a blade.
No-Respect Guy: Almost every person he meets after joining the Boys, from Homelander to Annie's mom dismisses him off the bat and/or mocks him to his face. Justified as he's a normal jittery 20-something in a crew of hardened badasses and his tech skills aren't really relevant as much as he might like.
Not Quite the Right Thing: By the end of Season 2, he intends on trying to fight against Vought and Supes in a more legitimate method, helping politician Victoria Neuman with her anti-Vought campaign rather than as a Vigilante Man. Unfortunately, he doesn't know that she's the head-exploding Supe seeking to take a foothold in the government.
Not So Similar: Like Butcher, he lost his lover to a Supe and starts walking down the path to vengeance for it. However, Starlight's influence convinces him not all Supes are bad and makes him reconsider what he really values in life. Butcher was not as lucky since he had no one but Mallory, who had fed his hatred for her own agenda. Season 2 cements it as while Hughie was always known to be kind, Butcher is revealed to be violent at heart.
One Head Taller: At 6 feet tall, he's almost a head taller than his lover, 5'6" Annie January/Starlight. It's more noticeable when she's not in her costume, which includes high heels.
OOC Is Serious Business: It's evident that Hughie is suffering a bit of a power high after taking V24. Not only does he seem much more ecstatic at having killed a man than he would have normally, but he displays little to no concern when Kimiko is injured and has her Healing Factor nullified, choosing to admire his empowered arm while Frenchie and MM struggle to keep her alive.
Pacifism Backfire: Hughie means well by trying to avoid violence by any means necessary, saying that there nothing brave about it, but unfortunately, this never works out for him. He left the team after Season 2 and joined the FBSA to try persecute Supes who abuse their power in the right way... only to find out his boss is the Mole in Charge for Vought, making any so called progress he made after a year working under Neuman pointless, so he agrees to Butcher's point about they need to do whatever it takes to stop Vought. By the end of Season 4, he tries to reach a peaceful with Neuman after her Heel Realization so they can stop Homelander's takeover together... only for Billy, who now fell completely to the dark side, show up and brutally kills Neuman in front of him, not only ruining their plans but helping Homelander on his own. The broken look on his face after that makes clear that now Hughie truly believes Violence Is the Only Option.
Personality Power: While under V-24, Hughie gains the power to teleport, which reflects Hughie's desire to avoid trouble and escape from The Boys so he can legally hold Vought accountable for their actions.
Power High: After consuming V-24, Hughie becomes high, and when Annie learns from him what he consumed, Hughie acknowledges he enjoyed the power and the confidence it came with temporarily being a Supe.
Rage Breaking Point: He eventually gets fed up with the Supes walking around like untouchable gods when Translucent tries talking down to him smug as ever, driving Hughie to kill him in a fit of rage.
Rejected Apology: A-Train finally apologizes sincerely to Hughie about Robin in "Herogasm". Not in the mood to forgive anyone due to the corrupting influence of the V in his system, Hughie's response is to punch A-Train in the face. A-Train doesn't even seem angry, more shocked that Hughie, who unbeknownst to him is on Temp V, could hit hard enough to stagger him.
Running Gag: Hughie is regularly the butt of jokes about being scrawny.
Hardly an episode goes by that doesn't feature Hughie being soaked with blood and guts.
Sexual Karma: In stark contrast to everyone else, his sexual relationship with Annie is wholesome and mutually pleasurable.
Shoot the Shaggy Dog: When his dad has a stroke, Hughie makes a deal with A-Train of all people to help him get ahold of some Compound V so he can save his dad from dying. As Hugh Sr. was already comatose when the V was injected, he turns into a Supe, but he's afflicted with dementia and kills people without meaning to. Knowing that his father has become too dangerous, Hughie concedes that he must put his own father down. His objective was All for Nothing, but Hughie's relationship with his mother and A-Train are marginally better from the experience, so only time will tell if either ends up having any long-term benefits.
Socially Awkward Hero: Hughie completely freezes whenever Butcher sends him on a mission involving socializing. When he sent to implant a bug in the Vought building, Butcher had to give him a speech about Red Pill, Blue Pill to convince him. Yet when he killed Translucent, he felt powerful, not afraid.
Supporting Protagonist: While Hughie is indeed The Protagonist, the main plot is rather about Butcher's war with Homelander.
Took a Level in Badass: He starts off as a normal and unassuming guy with a rather meek personality, but then Robin is killed and Hughie sets off on a path covered in blood. By Season 4, he's even gotten good enough in a fight that he can kill a trained assassin (albeit not without getting some wounds himself). Just because he's reluctant to fight doesn't mean he's bad at it.
Took a Level in Cynic: After learning that Neuman is both a supe and Stan Edgar's unofficially adopted daughter, Hughie declares that the year he spent working for the government under her was a waste, and that Butcher's extreme methods were right. Notably, he's so broken by this revelation that he's the only member of the team besides Butcher to take V-24 and gain powers, and actually steals a vial from Butcher to do so. Understandably, the rest of the team is ashamed of him for doing so.
Trauma Conga Line: Season 4 puts him through the wringer - he has to watch his girlfriend be humiliated and vilified on television, his dad's health declines and an attempt to use Compound V to save him fails forcing Hughie and his mother (who they had finally started to repair their emotional rifts with) to give him a Mercy Kill, and shortly after that, he's sexually assaulted while infiltrating Tek Knight's party. By the end of it, he breaks down crying in Starlight's arms.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Downplayed. Hughie is comely, but he is constantly referred as skinny and a twink, while Starlight is the most fanserviced female character in the show and has plenty of suitors. Maeve even makes fun of her for dating Hughie because he looks to her like someone asking to be the "dog rawed".
The Unfettered: Hughie himself starts to go down the spiral in Season 3. He is ready to do "whatever it takes" to stop Homelander and keep Starlight safe. His desire to walk over every moral boundary comes from his own insecurity and helplessness of not being man enough for Annie.
Unlikely Hero: Hughie's ordinariness contrasts sharply with the other members of The Boys and the Supers, especially early on.
Unwitting Pawn: In the first episode, Butcher manipulates him into planting a bug in The Seven's headquarters, under the guise of an official FBI investigation. Once Hughie has outlived his usefulness, Butcher is fully prepared to fob him off, but fortunately changes his mind and comes back in time to save Hughie from Translucent. Unfortunately there's the slight matter of Butcher not actually being a federal agent...
Was It All a Lie?: In season 4, when Victoria finds him spying from a minivan, he confronts her and asks her if their friendship was all bullshit. Victoria seems to be sincere when she starts to recount some of their time spent together with her daughter, and tells Hughie that she really saw him as family. She even wanted to tell him he truth about her being a supe at some point. Regardless if Victoria said the truth or not, Hughie carries his mission of trying to kill Victoria and throws acid on her face which only destroys her clothing.
What You Are in the Dark:
When in the middle of an attempt to kill Hughie, A-Train has a heart attack. It takes Hughie a grand total of two seconds to start performing CPR and making Annie call for an ambulance.
During "Herogasm", he admits to Annie that he took V-24 because he resents being in constant need of saving, which puts a temporary dent in their relationship.
During the fight at the end of "The Instant White-Hot Wild", Hughie chooses not to take V24 again, and instead helps give Annie an electricity boost so she can stun Soldier Boy.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: A more downplayed example - compared to the others, Hughie is the least cynical character in the whole series. While the other Boys, Billy especially, are jaded and cynical, Hughie is optimistic and determined, and while he is a bit naive at times, he learns to shed it pretty quickly.
Workplace-Acquired Abilities: His job in a tech store proves useful a number of times:
He knows carbon is a conductor and therefore that Translucent is vulnerable to electric shocks.
He knows how to use RF shielding foil to cloak a tracking device.
He knows how to quickly install malware onto someone's computer to remotely access their webcam or clone their hard drive.
He knows the procedure to use burner phones and instructs it to Annie whenever they need to communicate in Season 2.