Abusive Parents:
Season 3 reveals that Teddy has superpowers, implying that Madelyn either dosed him with Compound V or took it while she was pregnant with him.
She was also the the closest thing to a mother figure Homelander had growing up, and is a major reason why he's a complete sociopath. There's also a bizarre sexual aspect to their relationship, and the horrifying implication that she groomed Homelander since childhood and possibly outright molested the young Homelander.
Absurdly Elderly Mother: Homelander states that he's surprised that she could have a child at her age (late fifties, going by the actress's age, making it a fair question).
Arc Villain: For Season 1 as the Seven's primary handler, with Homelander as the Dragon-in-Chief. She gets killed by Homelander before she could become a series-wide Big Bad.
Asshole Victim: While being lasered by Homelander in the eyes is horrible and agonizing and even though her only redeeming quality that she had was loving her infant son. It does not take away the horrible things that she has done, such as exploiting Homelander's mother figure needs by having sex with him and very likely molested him when he was underage given the implication in Diabolical. She even enabled Homelander to do whatever he wanted such as giving terrorists giving Compound V, which also lead to them to murder Kimiko and Kenji's parents and inject them in order for the supes to be in the military despite how horrified she was and still allowed it to happen as long she used the consequences. The Boys and Susan are even more disappointed that they won't be able to have her prosecuted and get justice for the lives that she ruined since Homelander killed her in cold blood.
Big Bad Wannabe: In the end, while Stillwell controls the entire corporate aspect of the heroes and gets them to toe the line more than once with subtle threats towards their money and positions, she's still ultimately just a regular human being compared to superheroes. So it should come as no shock that Homelander kills her with ease once he gets tired of her manipulations.
Consummate Liar: She lies to Homelander about how Becca and his son died in childbirth. Homelander finds out only because it contradicts Vogelbaum's account of the same story.
Cruel and Unusual Death: Homelander kills her by using his eye-lasers directly into her eyes, melting away a chunk of her surrounding face with it. The gasp she makes implies that she certainly felt at least part of it before she expired.
Deceased Fall-Guy Gambit: Any issues that Vought faces, mostly regarding the Compound V leak to the public, are pinned onto her after her death.
Deliver Us from Evil: Notably averted. She has a new baby whom she dotes on, but it has clearly not made her the least bit less of a ruthless and amoral Corrupt Corporate Executive.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: For as horrible and manipulative as she is, Madelyn deeply cares about her newborn baby. When Butcher ties her up to a set of explosives and Homelander comes walking in with her son, she is terrified that he might get hurt and begs Homelander to take him somewhere safe.
Even Evil Has Standards: When Homelander reveals that he has been injecting terrorists with Compound V, Stillwell hides her face from Homelander (and the camera) the entire time, implying she is horrified at this development.
Faux Affably Evil: She has a very warm and personable demeanor, despite being completely morally bankrupt.
Gender Flip: Stillwell is a man in the comics and a woman in the series.
Glamorous Single Mother: She's a single mother with an infant son, Teddy, juggling this without any difficulty alongside her high-powered executive position. It's justified by the presumably very high salary and privilege of her job.
Hate Sink: Madelyn present herself as a kind and ideal woman to the public. But behind open doors, she is a greedy and manipulative woman who does not care how many people died or how many had their lives ruined when they became supes. She forced Starlight to wear a suggestive costume for marketing purpose and even though she said yes that Starlight can oppose wearing it, she still makes Starlight wear that outfit she wasn't comfortable wearing. She went as far as to exploit Homelander's needs for a mother figure while groping him and having sex with him while disturbingly calling him "my good boy". While she loves her infant son Ted which is the only redeeming quality that she had, she still exploits Homelander's jealously when he sees her with Ted and was a very vile person who's sole purpose was greed and lust for more power
In Name Only: Even outside of the Gender Flip, she has very little resemblance to the comic version of Stillwell outside of being a Vought executive. Much of James' main qualities are given to Stan Edgar.
Irony: When Homelander first made his debut, Stillwell believed that Stan Edgar had plans to embarrass her. As the main series shows, he either never had plans to do so in the first place or reconsidered, and is perfectly fine with letting her succeed him. Homelander killing her noticeably displeases Edgar, something he makes very clear to Homelander.
Middle-Management Mook: Despite managing the Seven, she's nothing more than middle ranked in the Vought ladder. By the end of Season 1, her successes earns her a promotion to Floor 82 where the executives are, and she's to be groomed as the next CEO after Edgar retires. This never comes into fruition as she's killed by Homelander.
Nerves of Steel: She never lets her emotions show on the surface or get the better of her. When Starlight successfully defies her orders, she keeps her friendly smile and demeanor until she leaves, at which point she starts cursing. However, while at Homelander's mercy, she admits that she's always been afraid of him.
Opportunistic Bastard: It quickly becomes apparent that she's not the one controlling Homelander, and in fact seems horrified by his extracurricular activities like killing the Mayor of Baltimore and handing over Compound V to various terrorist groups. But she is very capable of using the consequences of those actions to further her goal of getting supes in the military.
Parental Incest: Being the only real mother figure he had growing up, Stillwell also groomed a young Homelander into being her sexual partner, and it's heavily implied by her behavior, especially in the Diabolical episode featuring a younger Homelander that their sexual relationship likely began while he was underage.
Parental Substitute: Homelander regards her as something of a mother figure as he never had one. She exploits this to control him as much as possible, and Diabolical implies that she purposely groomed him to see her as both this and his sexual partner.
Rank Up: She's made the Vice President of Vought at the end of Season 1.
The Scapegoat: In Season 2, the leaking of Compound V's existence to the press is credited to a team working under Stillwell.
Smug Snake: This version of Stillwell's position of control is much more imagined than it was in the comics. In particular, she seems to think her acting as a mother-figure to Homelander will grant her his absolute loyalty and thinks she can keep lying to him about his child, with doing so resulting in him killing her in a rage.
Wife Husbandry: The Diabolical cartoon implies, that with everything else, she raised Homelander to be her lover since he was a kid.
Wrong Genre Savvy: In many ways, Stillwell thinks she is in the world of the comics it was originally based on: where the supers are all blithering incompetents and Homelander, while a murderous piece of crap, is, in the end, all bark and no bite to someone who doesn't rise to his preening. This assumption is quickly proven wrong when Homelander just kills her.