Action Dad: He has a daughter named Janine, and makes it clear that he wants to prioritize her and her safety over Billy's crusade.
Alliterative Name: Marvin Milk.
Artistic License – Military: He's at various points described as an ex-Marine, and an ex-medic. There is simply no such thing as a Marine medic, and the role that would entail is instead fulfilled by Navy Hospital Corpsmen.
Awesomeness by Analysis: He's able to determine the backgrounds of the clothes and other physical traits of Kenji using only the distant footage of a security camera, such as how he's wearing knock-offs from Taiwan. It's enough detail for Raynor to come to a serious conclusion.
Beware the Nice Ones: Aside from Hughie, he's normally the most kind-hearted of The Boys. But he is also a highly trained Marine and full-blown Papa Wolf who will not hesitate to kick ass if needed.
Blunt "No": He has this reaction to Butcher coming to 'visit' him after several years. He is not pleased at all and knows that Butcher means trouble.
M.M.: Oh, hell no! The fuck do you want?
Bonding over Missing Parents: He and Annie bond for the first time over fathers and sugar.
Brick Joke: In Season 2, MM gets strangled by Love Sausage's Prehensile Tail at Sage Grove. In Season 3, when they meet again at Herogasm, Love Sausage points out that MM seems familiar to him.
Broken Pedestal: He was a fan of Soldier Boy as a kid, waking up his grandpa to have him watch Soldier Boy stopping car thieves. Then Soldier Boy tossed the car at his house hitting his grandpa directly and many other family members.
Call-Back: In their very first scene together in season 1, M.M tells Butcher he is "just a motherfucker", implying he sees Butcher as a man who lacks any moral boundaries. In season 4, he tells Butcher he is a "motherfucker, but a motherfucker with a heart", showing how far their relationship has come.
The Call Knows Where You Live: Despite retiring from The Boys at the end of Season 2 and even taking medication to curb his desire for revenge, Billy visiting for info on Soldier Boy, who killed his family, compels Marvin to rejoin the group to get answers and closure.
Catchphrase: "Motherfucker."
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: No wonder he is not too thrilled to work with Frenchie again, besides the Mallory incident. MM always has to make sure Frenchie follows the plan, argues with him over some crazy idea Frenchie may have, and ends up in trouble regularly because of him. They ease up after the Mallory incident is elaborated on more, but MM's still weirded out by his habits.
Frenchie: Well, you know, in, uh, medieval times they locked prisoners inside a pillory barrel. Then they'd kneel in their own excrement 'till they got sepsis and died, so...
M.M., completely deadpan: Thank you, Frenchie, for that disgusting yet fascinating piece of trivia.
Combat Medic: He mentions having been this. He also gives Kimiko pointers on how to cleanly break Hughie's arm.
Cool Shades: He wears his signature sunglasses from the comics. Specifically when he's going incognito.
Deadpan Snarker: It's not like he has a choice when he has to put up with people like Butcher and Frenchie.
M.M.: So we got a French whore and a Steven fucking Hawking. Great job, Butcher.
Decomposite Character: Unlike the comics, he doesn't have the breast milk dependency and fetish due to him being a non-Supe. Instead, it's carried over to Homelander in the show (the fetish specifically, not the dependency).
Dispense with the Pleasantries: When it comes to Butcher, MM always sees through his bullshit. He knows that when Butcher is unusually nice, he is planning something or wants something. When Butcher tries to recruit him for his crusade, he pretends he just wanna see an old friends and even tries to hug MM, only for MM to tell him to just cut the small talk and describes they would just pretend being happy to see each other. Butcher drops the pretense immediately and finally tells MM the real reason of his visit, rebuilding the old team to kill The Seven.
Even the Guys Want Him: MM brings a heroin enema for Webweaver, but since he is broke at the moment, he happily offers to pay MM in nature, leaving MM disgusted.
Excellent Judge of Character: Part and parcel for a guard at a juvenile detention facility, he has a very solid radar for people and their moral leanings. Fittingly, he's quick to welcome the fledgling Hughie into the group, becomes fast friends with Annie, and even recognizes that A-Train is on the cusp of turning to their side, even making a risky power play to convince him to do it. This last move pays off because A-Train saves Hughie from a rampaging and pursuing Homelander shortly thereafter. He also recognizes that Countess Crow does not have the Hate Sink traits of her fellow Teenage Kix Supes and spares her life, allowing her to leave.
The Fettered: No matter what happens, there are lines MM will not cross. Even as Butcher goes further into morally gray zones, Marvin refuses to give up his morals. This is Deconstructed in season 3, as Homelander's psychotic issues and, you know, being indestructible forces Butcher to start considering illegal means to take the Supe down because there is no legitimate way left to rein him in. Marvin's fetters prevent him from following Butcher, and they end up getting further tested when Butcher recruits Soldier Boy to help take down Homelander, both because Soldier Boy appears to be a violent murderer and, more importantly, he killed MM's family. This ends up being the last straw for Marvin, and he leaves the team after the debacle at Herogasm.
Foil: Billy chose M.M. for very good reasons to be his Lancer. Billy is ex-SAS, while M.M. is an ex-US Marine. Butcher had an abusive father who pushed his younger brother to suicide, while M.M. had a strong bond with his father until an incident involving Soldier Boy. Both of them were married to wonderful women, but Becca died leaving her son with Homelander in Butcher's care, while M.M.'s wife moved on from him when he was considered a terrorist, but she is still alive and shares a daughter with MM. Marvin shares Billy's 'disease' to seek revenge and self-destruction. Monique knows he will not stop until he avenges his father, and much like Butcher, it will be death or victory. Both men worry about not passing their own shit into Janine and Ryan. Even so, M.M. manages to stay The Fettered, and is unwilling to cross the line, while Billy becomes The Unfettered, dragging Hughie after him, while associating himself with Soldier Boy.
From Camouflage to Criminal: He's an ex-Marine.
Happily Married: By all indications, he is a loving and dedicated family man, and the biggest problem he has with his wife is keeping her in the dark about working with The Boys. Even after she finds out, most of her anger is directed at Billy for dragging her husband into his crusade against his will.
The Heart: M.M.'s role, as far as Butcher is concerned, is to keep the team alive and together. This gets deconstructed in Season 4, though, as Milk is now in charge of the team and needs to be willing to take risks to achieve their goals. His inability to switch gears results in the team almost getting killed for minimal if any gain several times, while Vought and Homelander have been on a winning streak. Milk is also unable to take the bastard role which leads to the members outright disobeying or refusing to do their jobs. When Frenchie turns himself in because his guilt became unbearable M.M leave him in jail as it is his choice. Butcher asks Mallory to pull some strings to have Frenchie released and forcefully put him to work.
Heroic Build: While it's never brought up, Laz Alonso is ripped, and the T-shirts he wears in character expose his massive biceps. While Milk abhors violence, he makes good use of that strength while carrying Kimiko to safety with the effort of holding up a pillow. Alonso made it clear that he indeed buffed up for the role to match his comic iteration, and for Season 4 he lost his heroic build to show how stressful the war with Vought has become for him.
Heroic Fatigue: In Season 4, MM has reached his breaking point both physically and emotionally. After all the unfortunate events he suffered, he started to lose weight, suffer from stress-induced heart attacks and developed hives. He almost left everything behind and run away with his family in Belize, if it wasn't for A-train's pep talk.
His Name Really Is "Barkeep": Downplayed - his codename is Mother's Milk while his real name is Marvin Milk.
Hollywood Heart Attack: Despite never showing signs of ever being ill, save for his OCD, MM suddenly suffers of what it looks to be a heart attack after listening to Sage's Breaking Speech. Later is clarified it was a panic attack, but the nurse warns MM that if he continues to do whatever he does, he will indeed come to suffer in time from real heart complications.
Hourglass Plot: For the first two seasons, MM wants to focus on holding Supes accountable for their crimes and allowing them to face justice, while Butcher is motivated by Fantastic Racism and would gladly wipe out every Supe he could, with a particular interest in killing Homelander for raping his wife. Season 3 has these positions reversed slightly, as while Billy does want to recruit the dangerous Soldier Boy to kill Homelander, he's moved past his need for vengeance and tempered his racism. MM, however, cannot forgive Soldier Boy for killing his family or drop the issue until a later date, and has a falling out with Butcher over the latter's hypocrisy.
Hypocrite:
For all that MM calls out Butcher on need for Revenge against Homelander, Marvin easily slips into Revenge Before Reason when facing Soldier Boy, whose actions resulted in the death of several members of Marvin's family.
In Season 4 he enlists A-Train, the man responsible Robin's death, as an informant and bluntly shuts down Hughie's protests (Including the notion that he could lead them into a trap). While MM was right to place his trust in A-Train, this is still in light of him calling out Butcher working with Soldier Boy, who wronged MM and his loved ones.
Hypocrite Has a Point: M.M. repeatedly chastises Butcher for his Revenge Before Reason tendencies, despite being motivated by vengeance himself. That being said, he's absolutely correct to point out that it's rather unfair to expect him to let go of his anger when Butcher teams up with Soldier Boy, the man who destroyed M.M.'s family and caused him lifelong trauma, in order to get his revenge on Homelander.
M.M.: You know, when white folks get mad, y'all motherfuckers go berserk, but I got to turn the other cheek?
Jerkass Ball: At the start of Season 2 he's a lot more aggressive and prone to threats, especially to Hughie. Admittedly, it's suggested that this is because the latter continues to suggest a return to the crusade that ruined MM's life. Once Hughie calls him out on his hostility, he returns to his normal gruff yet kind self. He falls back into this in Season 4, frequently dismissing anything Hughie says and bullying him into submission when he challenges MM.
Jerkass Has a Point: Like Butcher, he's vehemently against Hughie hooking up with Starlight. However, whereas with Butcher it's mostly due to Fantastic Racism, Mother's Milk's main issue is that trying to maintain contact with her is extremely risky, since for all they know she could be loyal to Vought. While he still opposes it in Season 2, it's largely because Vought picking up on their meetings and conversations could not only put The Boys in danger, but also paint a target on Starlight's back.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: M.M. can be very stern, hot-tempered, and downright mean when pushed to his limit, but he cares deeply about his family, his team, and the young men that he mentors.
Knockout Gas: Throws one to Soldier Boy, which doesn't work.
The Lancer: He's essentially Billy's right-hand man, but is always the first to stand up to Billy if something goes wrong.
The Leader: Becomes this in Season 4 once Billy got demoted by the CIA for his countless lies and transgressions.
Leader Wannabe: His tenure as leader of the Boys during Season 4 quickly establish that he is not suited for the role. This comes from trouble shifting gears after being The Heart for so long and the various members of the team finally hitting their breaking points.
Lean and Mean: In the six-month timeskip between Seasons 3 and 4, MM seems to lose a good amount of muscle massnote  and is notably much more unpleasant as The Leader of the Boys.
AM/FM Characterization: Enjoys older hip-hop acts like Run–D.M.C. and N.W.A, tying into his childhood in Harlem.
Mirror Character:
M.M and Soldier Boy are very similar to each other but have key differences, both characters have served in the military and both have worked in teams that mistreat them (Soldier Boy was betrayed and given to the Russians because they hated him, whereas, M.M works with Billy Butcher, who puts his vendetta against supes before everything else, drags M.M into his crusade, and then forms an alliance with M.M's sworn enemy, Soldier Boy). However, the difference between the two of them is their idea of masculinity; Soldier Boy is a hypermasculine frat boy who looks down on men who look after their family and is sexist towards women (even hitting on another woman in front of his girlfriend), whereas, M.M is not afraid to be affectionate with his family and will protect them by fighting with everything he has, and is shown treat women as equals and was devoted to Monique before their divorce. Even their names reflect this, Soldier Boy and Mother's Milk.
Despite having contrasting personalities, MM and Butcher have more similarities they would ever admit. Both are former military men, both lost loved ones at the hand of supes (Homelander and Soldier Boy) that became the catalyst for who they are in present day, and both are worried about negatively influencing their children. Butcher and M.M. have even similar archenemies in Homelander and Soldier Boy, who is seen as "the Homelander before Homelander".
Season 4 highlights one more time they have same worries regarding Ryan and Janine. In a heart to heart conversation with Ryan, Butcher confesses to the boy that he told him such harsh words because he has a habit of pushing people away out of fear of not dragging them down with him. Sister Sage pushes MM's button by reminding him of his own fears of not passing his OCD and violent side to Janine.
Morality Pet: MM considers that his daughter is the only good thing he ever did in his life and tries to stay clean only for her.
My Favorite Shirt: He complains about when Termite slams into him and leaves a trace of vaginal fluids on his favorite jacket at 'Herogasm'.
N-Word Privileges: Defied. He works in a correctional facility and pointedly doesn't allow even his Black charges to use the N-word.
M.M.: What else does it mean? Come on, spit it out.
Inmate: Means that we're disrespecting all the other niggas—
M.M.: Excuse me!?
Inmate: All our fellow brothers in the unit.
Obsessively Organized: Frenchie points out that anything that's messed up, whether it be teens with no direction in life or the ice cream in a tub that's partly scooped out, ends up irking him something nasty, driving him to set those kids straight and finish that ice cream. This is how Frenchie gets him on board to help the mentally messed-up Kimiko.
Odd Friendship: He slowly builds up a friendship with Annie, culminating in them working together closely during Season 3. He is the one who calls her when Soldier Boy arrives at Crimson Countess' house, when not even Hughie didn't, and confessed to Annie what happened to his family because of Soldier Boy. They even go together at Herogasm to evacuate the people.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Mother's Milk is always called this except once when his wife calls him Marvin. He's sometimes called MM for short.
The Only One I Trust: Wen Butcher and MM meet for the first time after a long time, Butcher tries to convince MM to join again his crusade against The Seven by telling him he is the only one he trusts to do carry the mission properly. MM doesn't buy it because Butcher never fully trusts anyone.
Only Sane Man: For the Boys, he is much Closer to Earth than any of them, the only one with a proper job and not directly involved with gangsters or terrorists.
Order Versus Chaos: He is a very orderly person who feels most comfortable when things are by-the-book and go according to plan. This puts him into constant conflict with Frenchie who is chaotic and impulsive.
Papa Wolf: He's a loving family man and one of the most dangerous members of The Boys. His interactions with Starlight share a similar tone, as he tells her to wash her hands properly and glares at Hughie when he and Starlight discover they woke M.M. up.
Pop-Cultured Badass: One of the most seasoned characters, and wears a lot of t-shirts with pop references, such as Tupac Shakur, Snoop Dogg, OutKast and many others.
Pragmatic Hero: Sometimes, even MM will make decisions that would rather benefit him, like refusing to release the female when he meets her first time. Hughie even points out he sounds like Butcher.
Real Men Wear Pink: When the Boys are in hiding at the start of the second season, he passes his time by meticulously constructing a dollhouse.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He works at a juvenile facility where he regularly breaks up fights. He’s also the most moral member of the group next to Hughie.
The Reliable One: Next to Butcher (obsessive, not a people person), Frenchie (easily distracted), Hughie (naïve newcomer), and Kimiko (violent, mute, newcomer), MM is the rock that keeps the team together.
Religious Bruiser: He's Episcopalian, an ex-Marine, and a good fighter who will instill the fear of God into anyone.
Revenge Before Reason: A big factor in why MM ultimately leaves the Boys — his need for revenge against Soldier Boy drives a wedge between him and Butcher due to the latter wanting to use Soldier Boy to kill Homelander. While he has other reasons for no longer hanging around with Butcher, MM tries twice to take down Soldier Boy even when it is apparent he stands no chance against the Supe — making him a lot like Billy was in the earlier seasons.
Sarcastic Devotee: He always has negative feedback about Butcher's orders, argues with him about his plans and calls him out on constantly failing to keep his word about things being different. Not anyone can get away with calling Butcher a motherfucker and being dumber than he looks. MM is also The Reliable One to Butcher to get things done in his absence.
Scary Black Man: In his first scene, MM is introduced to intimidating the inmates he is taking care of. He is otherwise the moral member of the group, besides Hughie.
Semper Fi: Butcher met MM when he was still a US Marine.
Sherlock Scan: Even Butcher calls him "Sherlock fucking Homie" for discovering that Popclaw and A-Train consume Compound-V-like drugs after connecting the dots between Popclaw's fix kit and her telling A-Train that the V is dangerous.
Sickeningly Sweethearts: With Monique, his wife, quite in contrast with his grouchy demeanor with the team.
Sketchy Successor: While he takes over leadership of The Boys in Season 4, it's clear he isn't particularly suited to the role. This is primarily due to the scope of managing Supes outstripping anything he's prepared for - as the season enters its final quarter, Homelander is getting ready to enact a fascist takeover of the United Ststes, leaving Marvin wanting Butcher's aid despite hating the man.
Small Steps Hero: After the incident with Mallory, MM is quite happy to make a difference on a smaller scale when Butcher tries to recruit him again. He works as a juvenile detention center counselor when he is first introduced and accepts Butcher's offer only after he learns they have a real chance this time to take the Seven down.
Snark-to-Snark Combat: MM and Frenchie have a lot to say to each other all the time, whether is about Frenchie being a sex-crazed nutjob or about MM's mother and marriage.
Supporting Leader: Zig-zagged. As of Season 4, he's now the leader of The Boys. However, he's not the story's Big Good, with that role falling to Starlight due to her being the face of the anti-Vought movement, whether or not she wants it. That said, he still does make significant plays as the leader, such as flipping A-Train to their side.
Sympathy for the Devil: Despite not liking Todd, the news of his death is a somber one for him as while he was a bad influence on Janine due to his excessive admiration of Homelander, he didn't really do anything terrible to deserve being beaten to death.
Team Mom: While Butcher is the team leader, Mother's Milk is the down-to-earth one keeping things together. In Season 3, Butcher tells M.M. the reason he was chosen for the team, was his ability to keep everyone together. Butcher knows that no matter how low he will go, M.M. will always be there to watch over the Boys and take good care of them.
Third Wheel: In Season 2, he intentionally tries to stop Hughie and Annie from getting back because he knows it could bring trouble.
Token Religious Teammate: Until Season 4 which reveals that Frenchie is also Christian —or in time became Christian— MM was the only openly religious character in the team. He is an Episcopalian Christian, while Hughie is agnostic, Kimiko's leanings are unknown, and Billy is either an atheist (if he was just being provocative) or misotheist (if he really meant his comment), judging from his comment about God a "world heavyweight cunt."
Took a Level in Jerkass: Anytime he is in charge of the Boys, he becomes noticeably abrasive towards his subordinates, especially Hughie. After being put in charge of the Boys in Season 4, he's become noticeably stubborn and short-tempered. While understandable with Butcher, he's also become a Bad Boss towards Hughie, frequently dismissing his concerns and acting unusually aggressive.
Trap Master: Nails, ball bearings, electric wiring, pressurized, aerosol products, and a big can... this is all MM needs to create booby traps in Judy's home to stop Black Noir.
Twofer Token Minority: While everyone in the team has a different ethnicity (except for Frenchie, who has multiple ethnicities), MM is the only one who is a Christian (until Annie joins) and suffering from OCD.
Undercover as Lovers: Played for Laughs in Season 3. He accompanies Annie at Herogasm and when Love Sausage questions why did she brought a non-supe with her, she invents on the spot that MM is her fuck partner and he is very good at ravaging the vagina with his tongue.
Unknown Rival: To Soldier Boy. While M.M. considers Soldier Boy his personal nemesis for causing the death of his family, the hero barely registers him and just shrugs him off.
Warrior Therapist: He can offer good advice about the kind of jobs the Boys do to new recruits like Hughie. He knows what it feels like and the price for it.
What the Hell, Hero?: Gives these speeches to other members of the team when necessary, like scolding Hughie for meeting up with Starlight in spite of all of the risks now that he's a fugitive, or calling out Billy when his abusive treatment of Hughie negatively affects the latter's emotional well-being.