Accidental Murder: He didn't actually intend to kill Ambrosius as him slamming her fish tank was purely out of impulse. Deep does go into shock and cries about how his recklessness got his love killed, but the event marks the end of whatever redeeming traits he has as immediately after that, he pledges his servitude towards Homelander without hesitation, to the point where he would "kill every fish in the ocean" to prove so.
Achilles' Heel: His gills are necessary for him to breathe underwater, but they're also vulnerable to damage and weakens him as a loony fan finds out. When A-Train punches him right in the gills at the start of their fight in Season 3, the Deep doubles over instantly. When Annie gets a Heroic Second Wind after A-Train comes to the rescue, she viciously hoists the Deep in the air by digging her fingers in his gills, causing him to painfully and weakly trying to break her hold.
Acquired Situational Narcissism: He was already full of himself but in Season 3 his ego goes into overdrive, having convinced himself that he's Homelander's new favorite while unaware that he's only back in the Seven as a way to annoy Starlight. Played with in Season 4 where Sage butters him up by telling him that he's a supe and therefore a "superior being", leading to him threatening Ashley when she makes fun of him. The difference between this and the previous season is that the Deep actually is a threat to Ashley since he's a supe and she's just a human, meaning his ego increasing isn't based on a lie like before but rather is just him being a sadistic asshole, similar to Homelander.
Aesop Amnesia: He never seems to remember that his sad backstory doesn't excuse his treatment of women and overall sexual deviancy and every opportunity he's given to learn and improve himself ends up squandered.
Affably Evil: Despite being a sleazy sexual predator, the Deep can be surprisingly friendly in normal conversation, especially towards his beloved sea creatures. And unlike Homelander or Stormfront, there's no hint that it's feigned.
Alas, Poor Villain: Zigzagged. He's a rapist, sycophant, and an-all around asshole, but the huge number of ordeals and tortures he endures from so many people around him eventually becomes so disproportionate and out of hand that it will actually end up making you feel bad for him. Of course, it doesn't take long before he starts acting like a jerk again and reminds the audience why they hate him.
All for Nothing:
Despite all of his efforts in Season 2 working in the Church of the Collective in order to get back into the Seven, A-Train is chosen over him instead, much to the Deep's surprise and dismay.
Subverted at the beginning of Season 3 as his experiences with the Church of the Collective allow him to spin a narrative that he was a true victim of the Church, reclaiming his popularity and being brought back into The Seven. Then double subverted when the team is effectively disbanded by the end of the season.
Ambiguously Jewish: His surname, Moskowitz, is of Ashkenazi origin. That being said, he sings happily alongside Firecracker (someone openly antisemitic) at Truthcon, a Christian show. Also, in S4 E7, he refers to himself as a "white guy" to Starlight.
Arranged Marriage: The Church of the Collective plan to rehabilitate his image is to marry him to one of their members, a woman named Cassandra. At first, she appears as a compassionate woman, but soon proves to be ambitious and controlling with her own agenda. Despite being a terrible person, she does a good job at rehabilitating Kevin's image, until he ends up alienating her too, like all the women in his life.
Arson, Murder, and Jaywalking: After leaving the Church of the Collective, he denounced them for their abuse as well as their "unholy obsession" with the soda brand Fresca.
Attack Its Weak Point: Since his gills are his Achilles' Heel, anyone who attacks it will cause the Deep to reel in immense pain. Just ask A-Train and later Starlight.
Awful Wedded Life: At the end of season two he marries a woman named Cassandra. The Deep complains to Alastair Adana that his wife is a "weirdo who gives terrible blowjobs". Season 3 explores their marriage, exposing Cassandra as a greedy, cruel and controlling woman who forces The Deep to endure all kinds of humiliation at the cost of getting back in the Seven instead helping him grow as a person. Their sex life is not rainbows and unicorns either. The Deep's idea of having intimate relationships in order to get closer to his wife is to engage in a three-way sexual experiences with octopi. Cassandra feels completely humiliated by his demands and decides to finally divorce him by the end of Season 3.
Bald of Evil: In the final episode of Season 1, he shaves his head in a fit of depression. In Season 2, his hair is slowly growing back and appears as a long buzz cut.
Be Careful What You Wish For: In Season 3 he finally gets his wish of getting back in the Seven. Just as Homelander is growing more unstable with each day, and looking for a convenient punching bag whenever he feels stressed out.
The Beastmaster: Just like Aquaman, he can command sea creatures. Unlike Aquaman, he's absolutely terrible at using them sensibly.
Beauty Is Bad: Deep is a fairly attractive man with a hunkish build with a lot of admirers even after raping Starlight.
Bestiality Is Depraved:
Given that The Deep can speak to sea creatures (like dolphins), he's the butt of cruel jokes by Homelander and A-Train who both say he has sex with them. Judging by his side of the conversation he has with a dolphin he attempts to rescue, there may be a grain of truth to the jokes. Further vindicated when he throws some dirty talk at his octopus friend Timothy, to the annoyance of his wife (especially since he is having sex with her at that very moment). Finally outright confirmed in Herogasm when Starlight catches him getting sucked off by an octopus, whom the Deep enters a relationship with.
Deconstructed in Season 4 with his secret relationship with Ambrosius (the before mentioned octopus). From his perspective, Ambrosius is essentially a human in the body of an octopus, due to his telepathy letting them communicate like a real couple. In this universe, the sea creatures the Deep has sex with are all sentient, so he genuinely does not see them as animals, but as people. Strangely, his genuine love and need to keep Ambrosius safe is one of the Deep's few redeeming traits. He throws it all out the window when a real woman like Sage uses him for casual sex and asserts he doesn't care about sea life anymore, he just wants to hurt people so they have to take him seriously even if it's as a threat to their life; although it's implied he was trying to convince himself of this.
Better with Non-Human Company: The Deep genuinely seems to like most sea creatures, casually referring to them with phrases like "a good friend", and being shaken up when they die. They in turn seem to very much like and admire him as well, for example as seen with Ambrosius the octopus, or with the fact that he can get them to do all manner of life-threatening things (such as convincing a whale to beach itself in order to stop a speedboat) merely by asking. He also goes out of his way to help them, for example by trying to rescue a lobster from a supermarket fish tank or a dolphin from a theme park, which is a marked contrast to his normally self-centered personality. Meanwhile he tends to alienate all humans with a combination of his self-centeredness, rampant stupidity, and casual disregard for their feelings and even lives.
Beware the Silly Ones:
While he isn't the sharpest tool in the Vought shed, and also likely the least powerful member of the Seven, he isn't harmless. It's just that he lacks any strategic and tactical competence to use his powers effectively. His admission that he once repeatedly dreamed about drowning A-Train to death and the fact that he almost caught The Boys by commanding sharks to attack their boat and a whale to block their path is a reminder of how dangerous he could be.
He's a sexual predator who has abused several women throughout his career.
In Season 1, we see him easily knock out two thugs with a few punches. This shows that he's actually quite strong by human standards, it's just that he's weak in comparison to the rest of the Seven.
In the Season 3 finale, he gets another chance to show how dangerous his powers can be when he uses his ability to breathe underwater to ambush VP candidate Lamar Bishop in the pool and drown him.
In Season 4 Homelander sends Deep to kill the Boys, Annie and Butcher have a hard time taking him seriously because of his rants and reputation but he manages to give a brutal beating to Annie (who can't use her light beams). He also intimidates Ashley after Sage encourages him with Super Supremacist rhetoric. When Homelander orders the killing of half of Vought’s staff, the Deep corners a writer and caves his head in with a single punch.
Black Comedy Animal Cruelty:
Not on him so much (the dolphin was the one who wanted him to do sex stuff to it), but the dolphin and lobster he attempted to rescue both ended up dead on his watch.
In Season 2, a whale he brings in to stop The Boys gets fatally rammed by their speedboat!
A VERY dark example in Season 3; he is forced by Homelander (possibly tipped off by his wife) to eat an octopus friend of his from his aquarium who he looks at during sex.
"He's praying."
The Deep eventually goes full bestiality when he gets a blowjob from an octopus at Herogasm, and later tries to rope it into a threesome with his sham wife. Subverted in that the octopus later becomes his actual girlfriend.
Blessed with Suck: Being able to talk to aquatic creatures sounds like a fun superpower with no drawbacks, right? Unless you're a suburban kid who can hear everyone's pet goldfish begging for mercy. Or your sociopathic boss makes you eat a live, still-wriggling octopus (whose name and family situation you know) just to prove that he owns you.
Blue-and-Orange Morality: For all his awful sexual crimes, it's suggested that Deep's tendency to do it with fish stems less out of malice and more from a genuine belief that they can consent to it, given that he can communicate with them as if they were people and has been able to do so since he was a kid. That said, it won't stop him from killing or otherwise harming them as he would any human, either.
Brainless Beauty: He looks good but is a complete idiot with an awful personality.
Book Dumb: Deep doesn't know how to spell correctly Ashley's name (he wrote it down as "Ashlee" on the kill list), and he not only never heard of the capybara, but cannot even retain how to pronounce it properly, pronouncing the word as "capibarnia" to Ashley.
Brick Joke: In Season 1, he was trying to write his memoir Deeper but was having trouble actually putting down words. In Season 3 it's finally been published and he's peddling it for all it's worth, yet secretly admits to Homelander it's been ghostwritten.
Broken Bird: He compares his treatment of Starlight to how he was treated when he first joined the team, saying it's just how the hierarchy works. With his love of marine life being his only redeeming feature, it's possible that he was a genuinely good guy before joining the Seven.
Broken Pedestal: To use Starlight's own words, she "had a school girl crush on" The Deep. To say she was shocked, upset, and angered that he forced her to give him a blowjob is an understatement. When the Deep gets reinstated, Starlight nearly blacks out from fear and rage.
Body Horror: The gills in his torso are, at very least, unsettling to look at. The Deep suffers from body image issues because of them.
Boobs-and-Butt Pose: No matter how embarrassing or cringey it was, this is how he introduces himself after it is announced he won the competition show 'American Hero'.
Butt-Monkey: The most definitive example in the entire series. At first he is accomplished by ordinary standards (being a handsome, successful, and widely-beloved crime-fighter and celebrity), he was always this to the rest of the Seven. Starlight says that the others see him as a joke ("you're just the fish guy"), and he isn't seen being given any respect by them. He appears to be by far the weakest of the team as well; Starlight can shoot light, shrug off .50 caliber bullets, bench press a car, and so on, Maeve can stop a speeding semi-truck effortlessly, A-Train can run at supersonic speeds and has the Required Secondary Powers for that to work, Translucent can become both (almost) invincible and invisible, Black Noir is strong/fast enough to flatten Kimiko, and Homelander is an outright Physical God. The Deep? He has slightly superhuman strength (enough to Neck Lift a guy, make another back-flip by punching him, and punch out an A-Train who's not using his speed, and that's about it), can breathe underwater, can swim well, and... can talk to sea creatures.
He can't even use those powers efficiently, (see Cool, but Stupid below) and the animals he tries to save end up getting killed. So far the only time he looked threatening using his powers was in The Boys: Diabolical, when he interrogated a drug dealer with a shark and let the animal eat him alive. But in the very same episode, he's defeated by a girl with the power to control poop, in a sewer, surrounded by black water, and that gets called a better power than his. In Season 3, he gets into a fight with A-Train who isn't using his super speed, and only manages to tie. No wonder no one respects him.
This is somewhat subverted in Season 4. Deep is actually stronger than Starlight and almost wins in a fist fight with her.. Even so, he still gets his shit rocked by getting double-teamed by her and A-Train.
Captain Fishman: His whole deal is his Super Not-Drowning Skills and that he can talk to sea-life. Because of how specific his power-set is (and for marketing reasons), The Deep is often stuck with water-related crime fighting and resents it a little.
Character Development: In contrast to A-Train coming to regret his past actions, the Deep in Season 4 begins to realize that despite other supes being stronger than him, he is still a threat to regular humans. This is seen when Sage tells him he's superior and should start acting like it, resulting in him threatening to drown Ashley after she makes fun of him, and sounding disturbingly like Homelander when he does it.
Chronic Villainy: In spite of both his sad past and genuine desire to help sea creatures, the Deep never manages to make a Heel–Face Turn or even a Hazy-Feel Turn because of his ego and Lack of Empathy toward others. Season 3 has him become a Falsely Reformed Villain to get back into the Seven, with the following season finally having him Jumping Off the Slippery Slope and decide to embrace being a complete douchebag and villain by leaving Ambrosius to die and offering to kill every fish in the sea for Homelander.
Church of Happyology: In Season 2, he joins the Church of the Collective after a few sessions meant to better himself. In reality, he was just trying to weasel his way back into the Seven. It didn't work.
Co-Dragons: The Deep has this relationship with A-Train and the second Black Noir. All three function as Homelander's personal enforcers when he can't be bothered doing his own killing and maiming. The Deep differs from the others by being blindly devoted to Homelander while A-Train eventually turns on him and Neo Noir expresses his discomfort at following such orders.
Cool, but Stupid: The only way to sum up how he uses powers, best seen when he chases the Boys in the ocean. Despite having a massive advantage thanks to the school of sharks and a sperm whale at his command, he squanders it all when instead of making use of their speed and mass to capsize their boat and leave them at his mercy, he orders the whale against all common sense to cut off the Boys' escape route by beaching herself in front of their destination so he can pose for nonexistent cameras. Even if Butcher wasn't crazy to ram the whale at top speed, the Deep never bothered to think that since the whale is now immobile and therefore useless, the Boys could just, you know, turn the boat and slightly alter their path so they would land on the coast anyways, where they would have the overwhelming advantage against him in both numbers and power.
Cosmic Plaything: Name a single instance where he’s actually treated with respect. We’ll wait.
The Corruptor: To the New Black Noir. Downplayed in the Noir II doesn't have that much of a problem with killing people when told to, he states to have no experience in it and doesn't enjoy murder. Deep tells him that the Old Noir reveled in killing and encourages him to do the same. New Noir later gets boner from the purge in Vought Tower.
Cruel Mercy: After the fact came to light that The Deep had sexually assaulted Starlight, and countless other women, he's spared any jail time, and is still a member of The Seven. However, he's exiled from New York City and assigned to patrol Sandusky, Ohio, a peaceful and relatively crime free town, and given a meager daily allowance. His main tasks are to attend local business openings and roller coaster inaugurations as well as put up with whatever vitriol the locals throw at him. When the military allows supes to volunteer, The Deep asks his handler how soon can he can join the Navy and get out of Sandusky, only to be told that for the time being, he's not allowed to go anywhere else.
Didn't Think This Through:
His strategy to try and capture The Boys in Season 2 lacks foresight - in particular, he tries to block their escape with a beached whale, not considering whether they will be able to go around it or whether he could get her back into the ocean before she suffocates. Butcher ramming the whale with their boat wasn't on his mind either.
He tries to save a dolphin from Oceanland without considering that the police might come after him, and doesn't take adequate measures to secure the dolphin in the van he is driving. One hard stop sends it flying through the windshield, leaving it helpless in front of a semi-truck.
He tries to take a lobster from a grocery store home (presumably as either a friend or pet), but forgets to say he wanted it alive. One of the staff rams a knife through its head.
Not necessarily an example that is his fault, but the Deep seems to have horrible scriptwriters for any advertising he does, with the two he did for Liquid Death having him expose children to either burning plastic fumes or lit cigarettes. Another for a Japanese soy sauce brand has him happily exclaiming over sushi, which is at odds with his "Friend of Sea Creatures" image projected by, for example, his being the face of Oceanworld. It doesn't help that Deep is often too dumb to see what is wrong with what he promotes, and/or won't stand up against it even if he does (e. g. he would not want to eat sushi since that's made from his fish friends, but will still advertise it).
Dirty Coward: When push comes to shove, he's not enthusiastic about the idea of fighting back and tends to avoid confrontations or taking responsibility for his actions. He would rather freak out and worry about his own life rather than consider the consequences. This, alongside his lack of proper thinking, is one of the reasons why he is seen as a joke by the rest of the Seven, and Homelander even alludes to this trope in the Season 3 finale about why he has trouble having Deep in the team, citing his decision to get laid with an octopus and run away with it during Herogasm rather than confronting Soldier Boy.
Even after getting a lot more bravado after buying into Sage's Super Supremacist ideology, it only emphasizes just how cowardly he truly is at his core as A-Train points out in their last meeting in Season 5 about how The Deep is too terrified of Homelander to break away like he did, which The Deep immediately denies. This is proven false in the next episode when The Deep pisses his pants after Homelander threatens to laser him when it looks like Soldier Boy died instead of him.
The Ditz: Definitely the dimmest bulb in the show, compounded by his inability to understand other people's feelings. In the beginning of Season 3 he bumps into Homelander who is obviously pissed off yet manages to say some fake platitudes in-between grinding his teeth. Rather than take this as a sign that he should run as far away as possible, the Deep instead thinks Homelander honestly likes him. Or maybe he did notice that Homelander was pissed, and concluded that his not getting murdered was the best possible outcome. However, he's also completely baffled that Starlight doesn't like him and doesn't want to patrol with him after he raped her, giving more credence to the first interpretation.
Does Not Like Spam: He dislikes seafood which, given the nature of his powers, is quite justified. Even when presented with an already dead lobster, he's uncomfortable and quietly asks for some bread before reluctantly giving in to appease Homelander. This gets even worse when he's presented with a live octopus (that he considers a friend) and ordered to eat it. Could be Fridge Brilliance, depending on how ambiguous his Jewishness is: lobster and octopus aren't kosher.
Domestic Abuse: Starting with Season 4, Deep's behavior towards Ambrosius escalates into a textbook case of domestic abuse. Deep's manipulative tactics include lying and gaslighting, making Ambrosius feel responsible for his actions. He breaks his promises to move her in the bigger aquarium above his bed repeatedly, keeping her confined in a small, dirty aquarium hidden in his closet. He even engages in extramarital affairs with Sister Sage, further isolating and degrading her. The situation reaches a horrifying climax when Deep murders Ambrosius after a fight about his infidelity, breaking her tank and refusing to help her despite her pleas for survival.
Doom Magnet: Sea creatures have a tendency to suffer horrible deaths when he's around, several of them because he was trying to save them in the first place.
Drowning My Sorrows: He turns to alcoholism to cope with Humiliation Conga in Season 1, but drops the habit once he joins the Church of the Collective.
Dumbass Has a Point: His plan to use Black Noir as bait to lure Soldier Boy in so Vought can capture or kill him is actually a good idea. It only isn't put into motion because Homelander killed Noir a few minutes earlier unbeknownst to everyone else.
When given Ashley's list of employees with dirty on the Seven, Deep points out that Ashley herself knows more about them than anyone and should be at the top of the list, to which Homelander agrees.
Dumb Muscle: What he amounts to, even with the ability to control sea life — Deep is just so stupid that he never considers using his powers in ways beyond brute force. Complimenting this is that his only powers that don't relate to the ocean are Super-Strength and enhanced durability.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: As awful as he is, the Deep genuinely cares about marine life and considers them his friends. This is exemplified in Season 3 when Homelander forces him to eat his octopus friend, Timothy, even as the Deep practically begs for his life. He throws this out of the window in Season 4.
He cares about Ambrosius despite letting her die, as he was shown weeping in remorse recollecting the times they have together.
Even Evil Has Standards: The Deep is shocked when Homelander asks him to kill the running vice president and make it look like an accident as he says this is a tantamount to treason. He's also very disturbed by animal cruelty. Specifically mistreatment of aquatic life. This is justified because he can literally hear their thoughts.
Evil Feels Good: His character arc in season 4. After many failed chances at "redemption" botched by his own low moral character, Sage's encouragement of his status as a Supe and Homelander giving him increasingly murderous assignments instills a twisted sense of superiority in The Deep. He goes from being given pause to outright murder to reveling in having people grovel before him before he caves their people's skulls in.
Expository Hairstyle Change: He shaves his head bald at the end of Season 1 once he loses everything, but it slowly starts growing back in Season 2 as he resists every attempt to change himself. He's back to his initial hairstyle in Season 3 to show that he's made no real progess and has stayed the same douchebag he's always been.
Expy: Of Aquaman, being a water-based hero that can communicate telepathically with sea life, who is also regarded as somewhat useless (alluding to the long disused meme of Aquaman's extreme situational prowess).
Extreme Doormat: After Starlight outs him as a sexual predator and his career is temporarily derailed, the Deeps' willpower increasingly deteriorates to the point where Homelander can get him to say yes to anything. By Season 4 he fully intended to give A-Train a blowjob on command.
Extreme Omnisexual: Humans and maritime life, and if he can have a ménage-a-trois with both, even better.
Face of an Angel, Mind of a Demon: He's a handsome, muscular man who's a rapist and eventually grows to be a sadist as well.
Failure Hero: Anytime he does try to do the right thing, it goes hilariously wrong. Take for instance his rescue of the dolphin and the lobster.
Fair-Weather Friend: When Alistair tells the Deep and A-Train that they're both suspects in leaking vital information to the press, Deep immediately accuses A-Train. Alistair then reassures him that this actually worked in their favour and would guarantee re-entry back into The Seven, at which point the Deep offers A-Train a high-five...only for Alistair to say that The Seven just wants A-Train back.
Fan Disservice: His ass appears in two infamous situations; when he is about to mouth-rape Annie and in the third season, where Annie catches him getting a blow job from an octopus.
Fantastic Racism: After talking with Sage, the Deep turns into a Super Supremacist.
Faux Affably Evil: While his affability is often genuine, he slides into this when he confronts Butcher and Starlight with Black Noir in The Boys' headquarters in Season 4.
Fatal Flaw: Inability to own up to his mistakes and Pride. A large part of the reason the Deep gets screwed over so much by everyone is that he can't acknowledge his flaws and thus tends just to brush off other's issues with his behavior. When he is finally faced with the consequences of his choices, he's too self-centered to change.
Foil:
To Homelander. Both are narcissist sex offenders and psychopathic Man Children who suffer humiliations in a way of another, but they are also very different from each other as characters. Homelander is the most powerful and important member of the Seven, being both the leader and the mascot for Vought, whereas the Deep is the weakest and least valuable member of the team. The Deep is mostly a harmless Butt-Monkey most of the time, but Homelander just becomes more and more unhinged with each humiliation he suffers, cementing his status as Knight of Cerebus with each season. The Deep is shown to be a fairly muscular man, yet he is a very weak Supe, whereas Homelander is Lean and Mean, but otherwise World's Strongest Man. They both wear pads under their costumes, The Deep for fanservice, and Homelander to make himself look more physically imposing than he is. After undergoing a level of jerkass Season 4 by getting addicted to committing violence to anyone who disrespects him and crossing the Moral Event Horizon by killing Ambrosius, the Deep has become a Foreshadowing Mirror Character to Homelander.
To A-Train. Both are the members with the most focus outside of Homelander and Starlight, have insecurities about their powers and reputation which drive them into a stressed position, are spineless and repeatedly try to dodge responsibility for their actions, and are the least respected members of the Seven. They are also the catalyst for Hughie and Annie's misery and turmoil throughout the show, with A-Train accidentally killing Hughie's girlfriend and then laughing it off about it while Deep shamelessly decides to sexually extort Annie in her first day as a member of the Seven. They also want to genuinely help out those whom they closely affiate with (marine life for Deep, black people for A-Train) and are hilariously inept in their performance. The two are also kicked out of the Seven in Season 2 and are forced to spend time in the Church of the Collective to reflect on their past misdeeds before rejoining the Seven later on. Finally, they are forced to deal with the consequences of their actions that accentuate their hopelessness and depression. However, where A-Train gradually becomes conflicted with his time in the Seven and genuinely feels remorse for his past actions, Deep barely learns anything and doubles down on his vices. This reaches it's culmination in Season 4 where A-Train seems to be on his way to becoming an actual hero as his way to make up for his past while Deep has increasingly committed himself into Homelander's services to the point of unhesitantly murdering anyone under his orders as well as embrace the rhetoric of Supes being superior to humans.
Form-Fitting Wardrobe: While hardly the only male in the Seven wearing a fit superhero costume, Kevin's costume stands out the most as is clear that its purpose is to accentuate Deep's status as Mr. Fanservice.
Freudian Excuse: His drug-induced journey of enlightenment has him argue with his gills about why he sexually harasses and assaults women; because he has his own insecurities about his body and dehumanizes and humiliates women before they can humiliate him first. He also talks about how his powers meant that he could hear aquatic animals begging for their lives since he was only 9 years old.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: Let it be made clear that there are practically zero people who think that his past abuse and perceived uselessnes is justification for everything he has done to all the women he's subjected to Sexual Extortion. Starlight, in particular, is absolutely livid upon learning of his lack of respect among the Seven, since he had used his supposedly high rank to pull a Casting Couch. At one point, even his own gills call him out on always humiliating women first merely out of fear that they might want to eventually humiliate him in turn.
Friendly Rivalry: An entirely one-sided version with A-Train. The two of them constantly try to one-up each other in order to stay on Homelander's good side, but the Deep still seems to see A-Train as a genuine "bro". A-Train, on the other hand, absolutely despises the Deep and makes it abundantly clear that he always has after he betraying the Seven in Season 4.
A-Train: Deep, just FYI… I have always, always fucking hated yo ass.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He's the least effective member of the Seven, with the show playing up Aquaman's perceived uselessness as Homelander seems to use him the least when it comes to his plans. Compared to their powers and marketing, he's essentially a nobody, and when Starlight reveals what he did to her at the Believe Expo, Vought easily severs ties. Later, a repentant A-Train confesses that even in the depths of his own greed and selfishness, he always wanted to punch The Deep.
Zigzagged by Season 4, where Deep manages to form a Villainous Friendship with Black Noir II and while frequently irritated by him, Homelander does give some minimal positive feedback when Deep proves his value as a henchman.
Gaining the Will to Kill: For all of his predatory and vile actions, Deep never actually kills anyone in the first two seasons, at least willingly. When he is ordered by Homelander to kill Neuman's political rival in the Season 3 finale, Deep is shocked, but carries on with the task, albeit with some hesitance. By Season 4, he becomes more open to violence, killing one of Homelander's supporters with a bat without question and gleefully taking part in beating Cameron Coleman to death. This is in contrast to A-Train, who starts the series by killing someone, but over time becomes more hesitant and contemplative of his actions to the point of being disgusted with murder.
Graceful in Their Element: When The Deep is in the ocean, he can be an effective hero as he was able to summon hundreds of fish to attack The Boys and he would have succeeded in capturing them if he thought through his plan more effectively. The main problem is that very few criminals or wrongdoers operate in the ocean, he didn't arrange back up or try to summon The Seven before handling The Boys, and he didn't think Butcher would be crazy enough to skewer the whale with a boat. Had he brought in backup, he would have captured them with a divide and conquer strategy, driving The Boys on to land and then ambushing them with another Supe or with a private army from Vought International.
Green and Mean: His costume is mostly green, and while not the worst of The Seven, he's still a self-centered asshole.
Handsome Lech: Kevin is one of the most handsome men alive, getting the attention even of someone such as Starlight, and his role in the team is to be Mr. Fanservice. On surface level, he seems like a charming, well meaning person who just happens to enjoy the attention he receives from his female audience, in reality, he always screws every chance he has to properly be with a woman by harassing, humiliating, and assaulting most of the women he encounters.
Hated by All: Starting with Annie outing him as a sexual predator, the Deep's reputation takes a deserved beatdown. Anyone who offers to help him out only sees him as a goldmine or a useful idiot. His later sexual partners all have ulterior motives and ditch him when he's unable to fulfill them. The only respect he gets is from marine life and every fish or cephalopod he encounters ends up dead. Topped off with A-Train unleashing all of his pent-up disdain on the Deep and Neo Noir almost turning on him once it's discovered they were both sleeping with Sage.
Heart Is an Awesome Power: While in general, his powers aside from his Super-Strength are extremely situational, his ability to talk to all marine life actually has its uses.
Most notably, he shows to be quite skilled at intelligence gathering to the point where he dismisses Vought's entire intelligence section once he takes command of it because he makes them completely redundant. His ability to breathe underwater and swim to any depths also allow him to recover stuff from the sea that would otherwise be unrecoverable, such as Translucent's remains or a camera containing the footage of the Flight 37 incident.
When he is actually fighting in his element, like the sea, he is actually quite the formidable opponent, controlling an army of sharks and a sperm whale.
He also seems to be quite the stealthy assassin when needed to.
Hidden Depths: He can communicate with sea creatures and genuinely really cares about how badly they're treated. He even tries to rescue a dolphin and then a lobster, though both attempts end abysmally. Despite his teammates' mockery, his ability to scour the oceans turns up plot-critical stuff at least once a season (Translucent's body in season 1 and the camera from Flight 37 in season 2).
Hoist by His Own Petard: He recruits A-Train into the Church of the Collective. When Edgar decides to take back one of the Church's Supes into the Seven, he chooses A-Train, which never would have happened if the Deep didn't recruit him.
Higher Understanding Through Drugs: Thanks to the Mushroom Samba described below, he begins working through his insecurities in his hallucinogenic state.
Hourglass Plot: The Deep starts Season 3 being in a stable marriage with Cassandra, his reputation is rebuilt among women and feminists, is a best-seller author with a movie adaptation of his book, and is constantly invited on popular talk shows. He ends the season with his wife leaving him after being fed up with his behaviour, she writes a book about all the abuse she apparently suffered at his hands, destroying his reputation in the process, again.
Humiliation Conga: He suffers a rather severe (and karmic) one during the first season. Stillwell rejects and mocks his request to do something more substantive and meaningful with his fame. He then attempts to rescue a dolphin from an abusive captivity, but it dies horribly, and the incident becomes a media scandal. After his rape of Starlight is revealed, he is Reassigned to Antarctica, being sent to "guard" the calm and largely crime-free town of Sandusky, Ohio. There, he's scorned by the townsfolk, given a minuscule allowance by Vought, is relegated to publicity stunts like opening water park attractions, accidentally kills a lobster he wanted to save, and is abused by a fangirl. By the end of the season, he's on the verge of a mental breakdown.
Hunk: Easily the most muscled supe. His giant biceps are mostly there for Instagram though.
Hypocrite: While the Deep does appear to genuinely care about the environment (or at least oceanic animals), he drives a gas guzzling Hummer, one of the least environmentally friendly cars in existence. This is the least terrible thing about him.
In a commercial, he complains about polluting the ocean, only to burn said trash, polluting the air.
In Season 4 he acts shocked that A-Train betrays the Seven and secretly hated Deep. In Season 2 the Deep openly told A-Train he fantasized about drowning him and they didn't really get on better terms throughout the seasons.
I Am a Monster: How he feels by Season 2 with a combination of his powers and past actions, though there were apparently other cases of this in his past. His gills are a point of insecurity for him and his ability to hear aquatic animals begging for their lives throughout his childhood unnerved him. With the reveal that Compound V made him into what he is, he delves into this a lot more.
Idiot Hero: He's far from the brightest Supe on the block. He makes countless impulsive, naïve and outright foolish decisions throughout the show which are all documented here. Even his attempts to do genuine good for the sealife he's supposed to protect invariably go awry due to his stupidity. He can't even properly space the title of his own memoir!
Ignorant of Their Own Ignorance: The Deep's stupidity is evident to everyone around him. If one were to ask the Deep himself though, he would say he has a "formidable intellect." FORMIDABLE INTELLECT! Lampshaded by A-Train.
A-Train: You're a joke and you're so dumb, you don't even know it.
Ignored Epiphany: As noted under Freudian Excuse, his hallucinatory vision quest does lead to him recognizing his predatory behaviour towards women and the roots of its cause. His attempts to actually cease this behaviour only goes as far as trying to boost his own self-esteem however, as the remainder of the season proves he's still as self-centered and narcissistic as he was when he started.
Immune to Bullets: He's bulletproof like most of The Seven, as he was not at all concerned about machine gun fire, focusing only in A-Train. He's also physically stronger than bulletproof characters such as Starlight.
Ineffectual Sympathetic Villain: The Deep is a selfish, egotistical sex offender, but he's also such a pathetic punching bag that the audience often ends up feeling bad for him because he never succeeds in getting what he wants no matter how hard he tries. Not only does he always fail to save any aquatic life (to the point where he unintentionally gets them killed), but when he finally gets back into the Seven after a whole season of suffering, Homelander forces him to eat one of his octopus friends and proceeds to use him as a punching bag from that point forward.
Insufferable Imbecile: Kevin is very, very dumb and totally ignorant to this fact. See for example his "Deep Thoughts With The Deep" series or his attempts to parrot Sage's observations.
Innocent Blue Eyes: The Deep has big blue eyes like Homelander, is a handsome man and his immature behaviour make him come out somewhat naive. It gets subverted once you realize he is a sex offender too stupid for his own good.
Irony:
After so many efforts, he finally gets back into the Seven in Season 3... only for the team to effectively disband.
He has a rather hairy chest, which wouldn't be helpful in any water sport.
Ironic Name:
There is nothing very deep... about the Deep. Every time something happens to him that might teach him to grow as a person, he ignores the Aesop and returns to his shallow self, caring just for his own image.
The fact his real name is Kevin. Everyone who has a little bit of knowledge about Kevinism, knows that people with this name tend to be unfairly seen by the society (the German one especially) as unintelligent persons prone to attention-seeking behaviour. The problem with Kevin is that he really embodies the negative reputation of the name.
It's All About Me: He's not quite as bad as Homelander or A-Train in this regard, but it isn't saying much since he's still a self-centered jerk who sees all humans besides himself as not worth caring about. When he sees all the heads exploding on TV, the Deep is more concerned with his own safety. Even A-Train had the decency to look appalled at the carnage, which says a lot about how little the Deep thinks of others. Considering how he was mistreated by The Seven and felt betrayed when he lost his position in Vought, he likely didn't care because he believed there was a form of justice involved. In Seasons 2 and 3, he makes his attempts to makes amends to Starlight about himself, bragging to her about self-forgiveness and trying to bribe her into sweeping things under the rug. Season 4 sees him double down in his selfishness when he discards his empathy towards marine life after accidentally murdering Ambrosius and becoming obscenely sycophantic for Homelander.
Japandering: Kirei Shoyu is a fictional Japanese food manufacturer who employ the Deep to market their soy sauce in commercials. The commercials feature the Deep speaking in broken Japanese and befriending an octopus and a flying bottle of soy sauce.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: While the Deep does have a (very quiet) conscience and genuinely feels remorse for his actions deep down, he's ultimately too selfish and cowardly to ever change for the better, and every redeeming quality he has is slowly stripped away in his attempts to further his own standing in the Seven.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: Getting kicked out of the Seven and suffering a multitude of humiliations gradually takes its toll on the Deep especially when his attempts to “atone” for his actions don’t get him what he wants. By the fourth season, he finally snaps and happily adopts a Might Makes Right approach, willing to kill anyone and everyone that stands in his way.
Karmic Rape: After being coercing Starlight into giving him a blowjob and being outed as a Serial Rapist, the Deep ends up being sexually assaulted during an encounter with a Loony Fan, resulting in him realizing how his actions have affected women.
Kick the Dog: When confronting the Boys near the end of the fourth season, the Deep decides to recant his previous apology to Starlight and mock the trauma she felt after his sexual assault. She and A-Train violently beat him to a pulp a few minutes later.
Kick the Morality Pet: The Deep had a genuine connection with Ambrosius, but mistreated and lied to her due to his shame of their relationship. When arguing with her, he smashes her aquarium in a fit of rage and doesn't bother saving her. He agonizes over the decision, with his hands shaking as she pleas for her life while reiterating her love for him, but allows her to die showing how low he's sunk.
Lack of Empathy: An interesting example because he is capable of empathy, but towards sea creatures only. When it comes to fellow humans, the Deep gives absolutely no fucks as shown by the large number of women he's sexually assaulted and then forgotten about. After accidentally killing Ambrosius during a heated argument about his infidelity, Deep decides to abandon his care towards marine life, cementing himself as a remorseless and unapologetic leech.
Laser-Guided Karma:
He sexually assaulted Starlight, making her give him oral sex. Later on, he is sexually abused himself during a one-night-stand with a fan, who shoves her hands into his gills (something quite painful for him) after he repeatedly asks her to stop. Later still, in order to satisfy Homelander, the Deep has to put something in his mouth he doesn't want: his friend Timothy the octopus, who he has to eat alive as it begs for a quick death.
The Deep is later set up with a sham wife to help clean up his image. He complains that she gives bad blowjobs, and she is complicit in his torture.
When Alistair addresses both the Deep and A-Train regarding some leaked information, the Deep is quick to distance himself from A-Train. Then it turns out A-Train just got accepted back into the Seven, but the Deep is still stuck in career limbo.
By Season 3, the Deep is a Deconstruction of this trope, as he has terrible things happen to him so many times that starts becoming excessive, with him being forced to eat his octopus friend Timothy alive reaching Kick the Dog territory due to how mean spirited it is.
In "The Insider" he murders his octopus girlfriend Ambrosius, who legitimately cared for him, just because she tried to warn him about Sister Sage not loving him at all and does so in the cruelest way he can by leaving her to suffocate after smashing her tank and even ignores her pleas for him to save her. Once she's out of the picture he discovers that Sage really does hate him, has been seeing Black Noir with whom she doesn't even need a lobotomy to enjoy their time together and that he just killed the only one that truly cared about him for no reason all while remaining nothing but Homelander's disposable patsy.
Laughably Evil: Make no mistake, he's a rapist, murderer, and all-around bastard, but he's stunningly stupid and incompetent, and his constant failure and suffering (as well his tendency to say the dumbest thing possible with sincere conviction) makes him so pathetic he serves as the source of much of the show's comedy.
Lethally Stupid: In Season 2, he tries to rejoin The Seven by capturing The Boys by himself. However, he vastly underestimated Butcher's ruthlessness during this attempt. He tries to force them on to land by using sharks to damage their boat and then he uses Lucy the whale to block the exit, believing Butcher wouldn't be brave enough to take on a member of The Seven and harm a whale. Except, Butcher just rams her with the boat and kills her, causing The Deep to fall deeper into his depression and develop survivor's guilt for getting Lucy killed. The Deep was operating under the belief that The Boys would act like comical goons who would give up at the sight of him.
Locked Out of the Loop: Season 2 reveals that he was unaware that his powers came from Compound V, told that he was born with a gift.
Logical Weakness: When they fight in the hallway in the third season, A-Train knocks him on his ass with a punch to the gills.
Lord of the Ocean: One of his monikers is Lord of the Seven Seas.
Lousy Lovers Are Losers: When Deep has consensual sex with women either she is a religious zealot that he implies is terrible at it or Sage who only does it during her lobotomy sessions. Sage is revealed to enjoy casual sex with her mental faculties she just really need the lobotomy for Deep.
Marquee Alter Ego: As mentioned under Adaptational Attractiveness, the Deep got an entire costume redesign for the show that includes ditching the dorky diver's helmet in order to better show off Chase Crawford's face.
Meaningless Meaningful Words: Deep thoughts with The Deep are a collection of Youtube videos starring The Deep giving his deepest thoughts about the meaning of things. Several "gems" include: "You have my permission to love", "Real eyes realize real lies", "What if we stopped offering thoughts and prayers, and instead offered prayers and thoughts?".
Meaningful Name: The name 'Kevin' has Irish roots and it means 'handsome'. The Deep is a handsome young man who got into the Seven because his physical appearance was all that matters to Vought. His role as a hero is to be objectified as Mr. Fanservice on Instagram.
Misery Builds Character: Thoroughly subverted. After suffering a massive Humiliation Conga in season 1, the Deep joins the Church of the Collective, gains insight into why he acts the way he does, and looks like he's ready to make amends for what he's done. Then he stays the same selfish douche he's always been that everyone loves to hate, and ends the season in the same exact position he started in, the same exact mentality, and still clinging onto the selfish goal of getting back into the Seven.
Morality Pet: His one redeeming quality is his compassion for marine animals.
Motivational Lie: He lies to the new Black Noir that he used to be good friends with the old one to stop him from leaving the team. He starts to describe what kind of person Black Noir used to be to impress the actor and make him stay.
Mr. Fanservice: Since his powers only make him really useful in combating water-adjacent crime, his main role on the team boils down to looking pretty on social media. He even uses booty pads.
Mushroom Samba: In season 2 Eagle the Archer (in the interest of getting him to join his cult), slips Deep a mickey that has him working through his body issues via a hallucination of his gills talking to him.
Muscles Are Meaningless: The most visibly muscular member of The Seven, but is a pathetically bad fighter.
My God, What Have I Done?:
Season 2 sees him go through regret for his actions and attempts to make amends, though most of the process is motivated through the chance to rejoin the Seven.
He's genuinely remorseful immediately after killing Ambrosius near the end of Season 4. While he claims to have no regrets about doing so afterwards, the following episode reveals this to be a case of Blatant Lies, as he's still haunted by her dying pleas for help.
Narcissist: While definitely not to the same extent as Homelander (which is a pretty low bar to clear), the Deep is still an entitled, self-absorbed, egotistical, and apathetic person who cares more about his image and position at Vought than anything else.
Nature Hero: He wants to be this for ocean life, but Vought won't let him (and even makes him shill for a SeaWorld knockoff).
Nigh-Invulnerability: Season 4 has shown that he is particularly durable, he's completely Immune to Bullets and MM said he didn't know how to kill him before Noir come back.
To put this in perspective, when Starlight beat up Firecracker, Firecracker was knocked dead cold after spattering her own blood halfway across the stage. Starlight and A-Train deliver a worse beatdown to the Deep, and he's still groaning and twitching afterwards.
Not-So-Harmless Villain: Despite spending most of his time being just a Lethally Stupid Ineffectual Sympathetic Villain, the Deep shows by the end of Season 3 that under a threatening commanding figure like Homelander, he can execute a flawless political assassination during the night, leave no clues behind and make it look like a drowning accident. In Season 4 the Deep is shown in his first proper fight with another Supe, where he dominates in a hand-to-hand brawl with Starlight (although admittedly she was struggling with her powers at the time) and would have killed her without A-Train's intervention.
Nutritional Nightmare: It's amazing he has as good a figure as he does considering he loves munching down on junk food whenever he's eating on-screen.
Only Sane by Comparison: Despite his cowardice, self-centeredness, and stupidity, he manages to be this during his time in the Church of the Collective. Such as when he calls out his future wife Cassandra for her romantic obsession with skeletons, or manages to break free from Alistair Adana's influence after he failed to get him back into the Seven and then tried to string him along.
Overshadowed by Awesome: Pretty much every member of Seven, old or new, is usually stronger or at least smarter than him. He is aware of how overpowered is by everyone else and lashes out several time about being just the guy solving water crimes or posing for Instagram.
Perma-Stubble: Subverted. Kevin does sports a nice trimmed stubble, but instead of being the grim badass anti-hero that comes with the trope, he is a pathetic Butt-Monkey whose all moments of badassery are sabotaged by his own stupidity.
Professional Butt-Kisser: He becomes Homelander's unofficial cock-holster in Season 3 with some tips from his wife on how to gargle his balls. Considering that Homelander just forced him to eat his own octopus friend alive, it highlights how pathetic he really is. By Season 4, even Homelander realizes how much of an obsequious yes-man Deep is, and to prove his point he orders Deep to give A-Train a blowjob. He doesn't even try to protest and although reluctant, he was fully ready to go through with it had Homelander not canceled his order. During the purge in the Season 4 finale, he coerces an employee into claiming he respects the Deep more than any other Supe except for Homelander, even though Homelander isn't in earshot and would be unlikely to care about this conversation at this time.
Psychopathic Manchild: The Deep is absolutely incapable of thinking for himself, waits for others to make decisions for him, has the emotional intelligence of a gullible child, and believes everything he is told. As for the psychopathic part, well just look at most of the tropes in his folder.
Psychological Projection: The Deep has a lot of self-esteem issues and severe body dysmorphia resulted from having gills on his torso. He sexually assaults women because he always assumes that his victims would anyway do the same to him or be too disgusted by his gills to develop a relationship with him.
Race Lift: He's black in the comics but white and Ambiguously Jewish in the show. Compare with A-Train, who is the opposite case.
Rape Is a Special Kind of Evil: Everyone thinks he's a massive piece of shit after he's exposed as a Serial Rapist, leading Edgar to conclude that he's permanently soiled goods that Vought won't touch with a ten-foot pole lest it starts a PR shitstorm they don't need on top of everything else.
Reassigned to Antarctica: After being exposed for sexually assaulting Starlight (among other women), The Deep is forced to make a public apology and demoted to working in Sandusky, Ohio.
Redemption Rejection: Every single time he is offered a sincere chance to better himself, he squanders it, in part because he can't understand or accept that he did something wrong in the first place.
Required Secondary Powers: Superhuman strength and durability. He needs these to deal with the ocean water temperature and pressure. It's implied he has dived all the way down to the Mariana Trench, the deepest point on Earth, which indicates he has the physiology necessary to survive being in water barely above freezing and immense pressure at over a thousand times that of standard atmospheric pressure.Reference
This is made explicit in Season 4, wherein he gets a beatdown from Starlight and A-Train- the two super-strong combatants only barely manage to put him under, and MM admits that he has no idea how to kill the guy.
Sadist: His character arc in Season 4 results in him developing an attraction to terrorizing his victims before killing them. This is aptly shown in the season finale where he corners an employee into singing praises for him, knowing that he is terrified and doesn't mean it when said employee praises Deep. It's clear Deep is doing this to amuse himself and lull the employee into a false sense of security before punching his face into bloody mush.
Secondary-Color Nemesis: His costume is colored green, unlike the other members of the Seven. While almost everyone in the group is some degree of scum, it does set him apart as a more personal enemy to Starlight, who wears yellow and white.
Serial Rapist: He extorts oral sex from Starlight, and Stillwell reveals this is far from the first time he's pulled a stunt like this.
Sexual Karma: Unlike Hughie, The Deep's sex life is never portrayed a good light. He has a history of forcing women to give him oral sex for being their hero and when he's finally punished for his actions, he's the one who gets sexually abused when a woman refuses to stop putting her fingers in his gills, despite telling her how painful the act is to him. In Season 2 he is in an Arranged Marriage with a clingy wife that is bad at giving oral sex according to him. His tryst with an octopus is the one time he's ever shown having consensual sex. This is subverted in Season 4 when he gets himself in an enjoyable sexual relationship with Sister Sage... who gave herself brain damage to enjoy it.
Shadow Archetype: He becomes this to A-Train. They both were at first huge asskissers who only cared for fame and money, but as the time went on, A-Train changed into a better person searching to redeem himself, while The Deep rather became more and more unhinged, enjoying killing people whereas A-Train is disgusted and doesn't participate in the murders of Todd, Dirk, Greg and Coleman. This hits its zenith in "The Insider", where A-Train makes a full and sincere Heel–Face Turn while Deep subjects his Morality Pet, Ambrosius to Murder by Inaction and fully embraces villainy. This was foreshadowed as early as the first episode; While A-Train killed Hughie's girlfriend, it was completely accidental while the Deep coerced Annie into giving him a blowjob without a hint of remorse.
Sleeves Are for Wimps: Not that he is not a wimp, but he has to show his biceps, if he can't show his torso because of his gills.
Slimeball: He's an opportunistic, cowardly, and misogynistic douchebag who represents the rampant sexual abuse in workplace culture. He gets a little better over the course of the series, but he's still largely self-centered and is rightfully treated as a Butt-Monkey by the rest of the Seven. Then he devolves into Homelander's subservient attack dog.
Spanner in the Works: He of all people serves as this in season 2. By recruiting A-Train into the Church of the Collective, he put the latter in a prime position to steal data on Stormfront's past stored in the Church's private archives and release it to the public. This leads to her downfall and slows down Vought's complete takeover of the US government.
Speaks Fluent Animal: Befitting his being a Corrupted Character Copy of Aquaman, Deep can talk to fish and other aquatic creatures, and they can respond to him in perfect English whenever a scene takes place from his perspective.
Stepford Smiler: He's become one after he's brought back into the Seven in season 3. He is trapped in an awful marriage and having to deal with Homelander bullying him, he makes fake smiles.
Straw Loser: The Deep is consistently portrayed as the least powerful and competent of The Seven. Furthermore, he is easily one of the biggest targets for misfortune in the story, which is both portrayed was deserved and Played for Laughs.
Stupid Evil: One of his defining traits. The Deep is very much a villain and has shown himself to be capable of causing genuine harm to both humans and his fellow supes, but he’s just such a moron that his blatant lack of foresight or common sense often bite him in the ass and lead to him being defeated.
Sudden Name Change: His name was officially "Moskowitz" earlier on Amazon's website, but it's shown as Kohler when we see rolls of past years of the Gamma Echo Delta fraternity.
Super-Reflexes: The Deep has some enhanced reflexes, being able to react quickly enough to deflect even some of A-Train’s punches.
Super-Strength: With casual punches he almost killed two humans, and he overpowers Starlight in their brawl in the Boys' office; sending her flying several meters and break off bits of concrete from one of the thin office pillars.
Super Supremacist: Season 4 has Sage encourage him to embrace this line of thinking, leading to him threatening Ashley in a way disturbingly similar to Homelander.
Super-Toughness: He endured a punch from A-Train, a punch that would go through a normal human. In season 4 he takes multiple punches to the face from Starlight, and she later bashes his face in with a barbell.
Therapy Is for the Weak: He rejects Eagle and Carol's attempts to have him better himself, though their odd behavior as members of the Church of the Collective also probably has something to do with it.
This Looks Like a Job for Aquaman!: Discussed. The Deep complains that The Seven only send him in for things in or around water. It turns out that the rest think he's pathetic and a joke, to his annoyance.
Too Dumb to Fool: The Church of the Collective tends to indoctrinate heroes to enrich themselves and gain influence, while Deep is dumb enough to pay and endorse them but he did it because he thought Alastair can indeed get him back into the Seven, the moment he realizes they can't he turns on them.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Already established as a predatory and violent individual, The Deep descends further into depravity in season 4 when he murders his octopus companion in a rage-fueled outburst. This act eliminates the character's last resemblance of empathy, as his previous affection for marine life is completely eclipsed by his ego and subservience to Homelander, to the point where the latter himself is actually perturbed by it. The Deep vows unconditional loyalty and violence at Homelander's command, demonstrating a chilling willingness to commit atrocities for self-preservation. Later, his makes a misogynistic tirade against Starlight, accompanied by a failed murder attempt, solidifying his transformation into a completely irredeemable villain.
Toxic Friend Influence: Convinces the second Black Noir how cool it is to kill people as to ignore disrespects.
Trapped in Villainy: Homelander makes it clear that he will kill him if he doesn't obey his orders, including assassinating a politician.
Trauma Conga Line: After Starlight hints that someone in The Seven assaulted her, everyone involved pretty much knows it's The Deep. It's outright stated there are other women, and with Starlight having unlocked the door, it's only a matter of time before one of them kicks it open. He is forced by Stillwell to make a public apology, then take a sabbatical from The Seven and get reassigned to Sandusky, Ohio. As Sandusky is lacking in violent crime, he's pretty much limited to water park openings. He meets a hot groupie and takes her back to his apartment for some playtime, and she rapes him while jamming her fingers in his gills (which hurts). When super-powered terrorists come to light, he's convinced he's finally going to get to come back and help out the Navy with dolphin-related secret projects, only to be told that's not going to happen. He tries to buy a lobster as a pet, only for the meat counter attendant to stab it in the head, thinking he wanted it for dinner. The last we see of The Deep, he's giving himself a Traumatic Haircut while repeatedly calling himself stupid. May or may not be enough to make you start feeling sorry for the guy.
Traumatic Haircut: He gives himself one after being raped by a girl.
Traveling at the Speed of Plot: A really egregious example in Season 2. He gets news at roughly the same time as the rest of the Seven that the Boys are harboring a Supe terrorist in the Atlantic Ocean and manages to find them first. The issue? He was over 700 km (about 430 miles) away in Sandusky, Ohio while the Seven were right by the coast in New York City, yet not only did he somehow cross that vast distance in an instant and outpace Homelander and A-Train but had the extra time to go around and find some local marine animals to do his bidding (although it might be possible that he was actually at the Church of the Collective, which could have a location near a coastline, or taken advantage of the city's location on Lake Erie to get to Buffalo and take the Erie Canal to the Hudson, though that would be a challenge for someone of his limited intellect).
The Unapologetic: When he encounters Annie in Season 4, Deep freely admits that he is not sorry for all the misogynistic tirades he's spat over over the years before attacking Annie with the intent to kill.
Un-person: Vought is seen downplaying his presence in the Seven by Season 2, much to his dismay. Ironically by the end of Season 3, the Deep is the only founding member left besides Homelander.
Unskilled, but Strong: Deep does have the strength to mangle regular human and is resistant enough M.M doesn't want to chance trying to kill him on a short time frame. However having not trained in a while he tends to flail around a bit and he is not used to guarding his head or gills.
Unstoppable Rage: Upon his intent to murder Starlight out of Revenge Myopia for "canceling" his career and thinking it's cool to "victimize an innocent man" (i.e. himself), the Deep pulls non-stop with his relentless attacks in their fight. Surprisingly, he would've managed to kill Starlight (also helping that she's incapable of using her Light 'em Up powers at the moment) if it weren't for A-Train coming in for the rescue.
Villainous Underdog: The Deep is the least respected member of The Seven due to his abilities only being useful for water-based missions. Due to his ability to speak to aquatic animals, he's forced to stand by as he hears the animals being killed and beg for rescue from their captivity. Even worse, he's forced to support companies that pollute the seas and harm aquatic life. None of that excuses the fact that he's been sexually assaulting women.
Villainous BSoD: Completely breaks down at the end of the first season, leading to him impulsively shaving his head in front of a mirror while crying and cursing at himself.
Violence Really Is the Answer: After murdering several people and taking Sage's advice into account, Deep concludes that violence is power. He equates people cowering in front of him when he threatens them with respect.
Water-Breathing Human: The Deep appears completely human at first, but is later shown to be one, with gills on his torso.
Weaksauce Weakness: His gills. Getting "gill-punched" by A-Train once is enough for Deep to double over in pain.
What Kind of Lame Power Is Heart, Anyway?: The Deep is an Aquaman expy, and rides very much on the "Aquaman is lame" memes. He is regularly dismissed by Homelander for talking to fish, and later shown in therapy venting his insecurities.
Yes-Man: The Deep's main use for Homelander is that he will do anything to stay in his good grace, no matter how degrading or illegal it is, and seemingly won't think of a way to get back at Homelander.