Ambiguously Brown: Obviously applies to any character played by Rashida Jones, who is black and Jewish. Semi-frequently lampshaded by Leslie.
Leslie: I've said this to you before and I know it makes you uncomfortable, but you're thoughtful and you're brilliant. And your ambiguous ethnic blend perfectly represents the dream of the American melting pot.
Amicable Exes: Due to their mutual friendship with Leslie, and him finding love with April, Ann and Andy form a healthy friendship sometime after breaking up. Likewise, she and Chris shared this relationship as well, before getting back together for good.
Back for the Finale: She and Chris leave Pawnee in Season 6 to start their family, but both of them return in "One Last Ride" with their son Oliver and a daughter they've named after Leslie.
Beware the Nice Ones: Ann's very nice, but she has her limits. Best exemplified in the episode "Flu Season" when April's in the hospital, and is being an Annoying Patient to the extreme. Ann manages to be professional and polite the whole time, until...
Ann: (looking at her watch) Three... two... one. Aaaand my shift's over. (turns around to face April and takes a deep breath) WHAT THE [BLEEP] IS YOUR PROBLEM?!
Big Eater: She apparently once consumed an entire cheesecake at Leslie's request, commenting only that it was delicious and that she would have eaten ten if asked.
The Bore: Her lack of any interesting hobbies or quirks, especially in comparison to Leslie, is frequently played for laughs, to the point of becoming a quirk in and of itself.
Cannot Tell a Joke: She notably fails when she attempts to be funny, often saying an awkward joke and then immediately regretting it and kicking herself under her breath.
Leslie: Oh Ann, you're too beautiful to be funny. It's not your fault. You've never had to compensate for anything.
Contrasting New Love Interest: She has a couple over the course of the series. She starts with Mark, the Only Sane Man with a steady job, and a more mature approach to life compared to the ditzy, chaotic life Andy leads. After moving on from Mark, she dates Chris, who’s different AGAIN, being more upbeat and having a stronger zest for life than the dour, serious Mark.
Deuteragonist: In the first two seasons, her dynamic with Leslie and relationship struggles brought her to the forefront of an episode's plot almost as much as Leslie.
Expository Hairstyle Change: Colors a few locks of her hair bright red in an attempt to impress Chris in "Camping".
Extreme Doormat: Definitely has elements of this. She's very passive compared to Leslie and is always pulled into Leslie's plans. Also, due to the Florence Nightingale Effect and Weakness Turns Her On, she's very inclined to allow boyfriends to take advantage of her.
Fire-Forged Friends: Their shared ambition to fill the Lot 48 pit quickly turns Leslie and her into the best of friends.
Florence Nightingale Effect: Ann is clearly shown to be attracted to vulnerable and sickly men. She waited on Andy hand and foot when his legs broke, coddles him and protects him like a child, and kisses him when he ends up in the hospital again. She was also incredibly threatened and uncomfortable by Chris being almost completely perfect until he got a nasty case of the flu, which made her ecstatic.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Leslie. They're the best of friends and absolutely love each other, with Leslie even lamenting how "tragic" it is that they're both straight.
Rachel Lerpiss: Are you a couple?
Leslie Knope: No. Tragically, we are both heterosexual.
Hospital Hottie: She's a nurse, and comments about her attractiveness are frequently bandied about by Leslie and Tom. Not that she actually spends much time working there (at least on-screen).
Mistaken for Gay: As a Running Gag, she and Leslie are repeatedly mistaken for a lesbian couple.
Mixed Ancestry Is Attractive: Her ethnic ambiguity is frequently praised by Leslie ("Nobody can match your ethnic hybrid energy."), who also suggests this will be passed down positively in any children she has.
Leslie: But you are so brilliant and kind and stupid hot, you're definitely going to find a wonderful guy who loves you and respects you and fills your home with multiethnic genius babies.
Nice Girl: She's generally a friendly, amiable sort of person who wants to help people and sincerely loves her friends. She's also one of the few people to be consistently nice to Jerry than the others.
Official Couple: After going through a Relationship Revolving Door, she and Chris become this in Season 6.
One-Hour Work Week: Her nursing job. The show is a Work Com, it's just not dedicated to her work. Occasionally we see her at her work, usually whenever a main character ends up in the hospital. Ann getting a part-time job at the city's health department as of the end of Season 3 is most likely an attempt to avert this trope. Possibly justified: since this is a Mockumentary, we can assume it is all done off-screen and has been edited out.
Only Sane Woman: She is the only member of the (initial) cast lacking any clear quirk that would really get them fired from their profession. Or just any serious quirks, unlike the other Only Sane Man Ben (who, despite generally being refreshingly reasonable compared to the rest, is still a dorky nerd with a Complexity Addiction).
Put on a Bus: In mid-Season 6, when she and Chris move to Michigan to raise their family.
Really Gets Around: She finally learns how to put her looks to good use in Season 3, and is shown with at least one new paramour every episode of that season.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The calm, practical blue to Leslie's energetic, eccentric red.
Shipper on Deck: Ann really, really wants Leslie and Ben to get together (and even sneaks an Al Green song onto their road trip mix, which is designed to be as un-sexy as possible).
Single Woman Seeks Good Man:
So Beautiful, It's a Curse: A mild case. Being so beautiful, she's never been dumped before. When Chris breaks up with her, his positive personality and strange wording plus her inexperience make her not realize it until a week later and she is blindsided by it. As Leslie put it in an earlier episode:
Leslie: Ann, I always forget you're so pretty you're not used to rejection!
Straight Man: Primarily acts as Leslie's comic foil, but will occasionally react with confusion or exasperation to the rest of the cast as well.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Maybe "best buds" is a bit of a stretch, but eventually, she and April become friends (though April won't admit it), though they still snark at each other constantly.
Weakness Turns Her On: As indicated by her finding Chris more attractive when she was caring for him than when he was a perfect human specimen. This also explains her relationship with Andy and why it didn't work out with Mark. But even she has her limits, as exemplified by Tom.
What Does She See in Him?:
This was the crux of her relationship with Andy in Season 1, who at that point was such a lazy Jerkass that he intentionally delayed getting his cast removed for two weeks just to have her keep waiting on him.
Ann goes through as many lame, unattractive boyfriends as attractive ones in season three. Leslie has to call her out on it in "The Fight" when her current guy happens to be The Douche.