Ambiguously Bi: When going off on a talk show host, he can be heard saying, "Everyone has gay thoughts!" He also wrote Star Trek slash at one point.
Aside Glance: Ben is the king of this.
Badass Bureaucrat: Ben is incredibly good and efficient at his job. He's managed to save six towns (including Pawnee) from bankruptcy. Upon taking on a new job in Pawnee, he takes to it like a duck to water. Other accountants in the series call him brilliant and he potentially ends up president of the United States. He's so good, even Leslie considers him "a genius." The fact they're both so competent and good at their jobs is one of the reasons they work so well together.
Bait-and-Switch Tyrant: Served this role in his initial appearance, wherein his cynicism and designation by Chris as the Bearer of Bad News made Leslie consider him the 'bad guy'. This very quickly changes though.
Bearer of Bad News: Chris often forces him into this position. In Season 6, it's revealed that Ben actually loved getting to play this role whilst working with Chris.
Berserk Button: Any mention of him as a mayor when he was 18 years old is bound to set him off.
Breakout Character: Steadily became the Deuteragonist due to overwhelmingly positive feedback for his character.
Brutal Honesty: Ben is a master of delivering frank but accurate assessments of the current situation. He admits that it's what he loves most about his job.
The Comically Serious: Generally always deadpan when faced with his co-workers' antics, though he does have a breaking point. Also indeed comparably serious to the rest of the Team (sans Ron) who are either pranksters, goofy, weird, childish or flippant.
Complexity Addiction: In regard to boardgame development. Ben favors intricate rules and playstyles that give the Cones of Dunshire an incredibly steep learning curve. The sequel is supposed to be punishing toward new players.
Contrasting Replacement Character: To Mark, who was initially placed in the role of Leslie's love interest, presented as a playboy type who was relaxed and cynical about government. At the end of season two he was written out and Ben was added who then took on that role, him being a neurotic, dorky geek who could be a hard-ass but deeply believed in government and had high ambitions like Leslie.
The Cynic: Though he gets better, thanks to Leslie and Pawnee in general.
Deadpan Snarker: While subtler than other examples on this show, he definitely has his moments, though most of the time he is more 'deadpan' than 'snarky'.
Leslie: Well, but Chris said you just had to tinker with things.
Ben: Yeah, he said that because that sounds a lot better than "we're going to gut it with a machete".
Deuteragonist: Very quickly begins to share the center stage with Leslie, to the point of practically being the co-lead in later seasons.
Drunken Master: He gets blackout drunk with Leslie at Donna and Joe's engagement party, and drunk dials Jenn Barkley to announce he's running for Congress. The next morning, Jenn plays back the voicemails he left, and despite being wasted he rattled off specific policies he wanted to focus on.
Jenn Barkley: Oh, you guys are gonna fit in great in Washington! Most of Congress is drunk all the time.
Extreme Doormat: Although he's capable and authoritative in a professional setting, it's revealed he's easily walked over in his personal life. He struggles to confront April and Andy about issues when rooming with them and a big milestone for him and Leslie is her realizing she can't just steamroll him and his feelings.
Ben: My family is very non-confrontational. My parents' method of problem-solving is to kind of keep everything bottled up and just subtly hint at what's bothering them.
Face Palm: Ben's typical reaction to Pawnee, its citizens, and his own personal disasters.
Famed in Story: Ben is somewhat well-known nationally because he was elected mayor of his hometown at 18 and it became a popular news story. Leslie had heard about his story before she met him and only didn't realize who he was because he was known as "Benji" Wyatt at the time.
Happily Married: To Leslie as of mid-Season 5. They are very much into each other and extremely supportive of the other's dreams and ambitions, with no jealousy or resentment to get in the way.
Hidden Heart of Gold: Puts a facade up when acting as state auditor and he has to be ruthless in order to make budget cuts and play bad cop to Chris' good cop. Years of being hated everywhere he goes also seems to have made him more brusque and closed off. However, it's quickly revealed that he's a lot sweeter than he appears and develops into one of the nicest characters on the show. He also softens up a lot socially thanks to Leslie and making friends with the rest of the Parks Department.
Iconic Sequel Character: One of the main characters who wasn't introduced until the end of season 2.
Improbable Age: He was elected mayor of his hometown town at 18. This is deconstructed since he's still ashamed of how his youthful impulses resulted in his hometown going bankrupt, and the entire town still holds a grudge against him for it. A caller to the Crazy Ira and the Douche radio show lampshades this in the most offensively unintelligent way possible:
Caller: Seems like eighteen is pretty young for a mayor. What were you, like, twelve?
In-Series Nickname: Ben accumulates a lot of these in his short time in the series ("Mean Ben", "Turd Boy", "Human Disaster", "Calzone Boy", "Nerd", etc). In fandom, "Human Disaster" especially has grown to almost memetic proportions.
I Resemble That Remark!: A Running Gag with him is Tom will make some kind of geeky insult about Ben and Ben responding with an even geekier answer. For example, Tom insults Ben by saying that Ben wants to take a Hobbit-themed tour of New Zealand, and Ben responds that he did not care for Peter Jackson's adaptation.
The Lancer: Both Leslie's closest ally and immediate foil following his introduction.
My Greatest Failure: Bankrupting his hometown of Partridge when he was 18. It's why he's so cynical in the present day, as he still carries a lot of guilt and shame over it and admits to Leslie that he works as a state auditor to make up for his past mistakes. Although Leslie eventually helps him move on, Season 5 establishes the Partridge citizens aren't so forgiving and the media brings it up to drag his name through the mud on several occasions.
Nerds Are Sexy: Leslie especially believes this; she's completely turned on by her husband's good looks, and proudly proclaims how sexy she finds him to anyone who will listen.
Leslie: So Ben will be running my campaign, because he's a super genius, and he's got a tight, compact little body like an Italian sports car.
Nerds Speak Klingon: He speaks Dothraki.
Nice Guy: Once you get past the Brutal Honesty and pessimism, Ben is easily one of the nicest and most reliable characters on the show, not to mention being the Only Sane Man most of the time. Notably, he's also one of the few, if not the only character, to have never made fun of Garrynote . Even other "nice" characters like Chris, Andy, and Leslie can't say that. Though even he never refers to Garry by his real name.
No Social Skills: Initially he's pretty awkward, tactless and doesn't try to make friends because he moves around so much. Leslie and the rest of the Parks department help him get more comfortable.
Not So Above It All: He seems like the level-headed straight man of the cast, but he has plenty of quirks of his own. His love of calzones, punishingly-intricate board games, stop motion, and general nerd culture, to name a few.
Not So Stoic: When some wise guy pushes his Berserk Button.
Odd Friendship:
Ben seems to have a supreme talent for forming these with other men. Tom, Andy and Chris couldn't be more dissimilar to him, but over time his friendships with each of them begin to border on Heterosexual Life-Partners levels of closeness.
He also 'came out' that Garry is his friend and the others shouldn't be so mean to him.
Official Couple: With Leslie.
Old Shame: He's deeply ashamed of bankrupting his hometown during his stint as teen mayor when he built an expensive winter sports center. When Crazy Ira and the Douche bring it up in "Media Blitz", it absolutely ruins his composure.
One-Steve Limit: Is an aversion. Ben was previously the name of April's boyfriend's boyfriend.
Only Sane Employee: He's about on par with Leslie in terms of hypercompetency at his job, but is both more grounded and less obsessive than she is.
Only Sane Man: The most normal and rational character on the show, as well as one of the most serious. Despite this, he's a shining example of how the straight man can be just as funny and interesting as their wackier associates.
Opposites Attract: Subverted with Leslie, as after their rocky first impression they're actually shown to have incredibly similar qualities and the Ship Tease ultimately results in a seasons-spanning romance arc and marriage.
Persona Non Grata: "Partridge" shows that his eponymous hometown still holds a very intense grudge over the Ice Town debacle. His sister runs as soon as a crowdmember points her out as a relative, and Leslie and Ben even get chased out of a local park when a ranger recognizes him.
Promotion to Opening Titles: In Season 3, along with Chris.
Proud to Be a Geek: Loves geeky pop culture and has no shame over it. Whenever Tom tries to insult him for being a geek, he isn't affected by it at all and will respond in a way that makes him seem like even more of a geek.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Blue to Chris' Red. Later Blue to Leslie's Red as well.
The Reliable One: To almost every character — he's Leslie's biggest supporter in her career, Chris' right-hand man, Tom's go-to guy for business advice (even if Tom doesn't take it all the time) and kicks Andy and April into high gear to become more responsible while living with them.
Resigned in Disgrace: Ben decides to resign when he and Leslie begin dating, which is against workplace rules because he's technically her boss. Everyone knows it's entirely consensual and neither were abusing their position, but it still triggers an investigation — which in turn reveals that they did bribe an electrician to keep his mouth shut, which looks very bad. They agree to just concede that they did screw up, and Leslie throws herself at the mercy of the council... only to get a slap on the wrist and two weeks paid suspension. She then finds out Ben took complete blame in his own hearing, and resigned. It then becomes a Running Gag in the next episode that Ben keeps specifically saying he "resigned in disgrace," and Leslie wishes he'd just say "quit."
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Savvy guy to Leslie's energetic girl. Leslie is a hyperactive do-gooder; Ben is her straightforward, down-to-earth love interest.
The Scapegoat: The debacle that was "Ice Town" caused him to be this for his hometown of Partridge, even though being voted into office at 18 years old and most likely having to have his ideas approved by the city council means the blame wasn't his alone. Continues into the present day, as Partridge's politicians still bring him up to deflect from their own failings. The current mayor even wastes time and money throwing a big fake key-to-the-city ceremony, something that would not be a practical use of city funds, just to boost poll numbers by bashing Ben.
Silent Snarker: Ben is a master at getting sarcastic confusion and disdain across with just his facial expressions.
The Stoic: He is usually the calm and sensible guy, compared to the other employees. He rarely laughs, cries or loses his temper.
Straight Man: He is easily one of the most sensible characters on the show.
Suspiciously Similar Substitute: For Mark. He doesn't have the same job, but he acts as a Straight Man to the rest of the cast and a foil/possible love interest to Leslie in a similar way. By the end of the third season, however, Ben is definitely his own character. Also, according to creator Michael Schur, even though Ben was brought in with the idea that he might be a love interest/foil for Leslie, he was hesitant to label Ben that, reasoning that they hadn't shot a single scene with the two of them yet, and implying that, like Andy/April, there needed to be chemistry for it to work.
Trademark Favorite Food: Calzones, which earns him no end of derision from everyone he knows. Although he is temporarily disillusioned from beloved calzones after he incurs a devastating case of food poisoning in "Ann's Decision"; it proves not to last for long. He is also in denial about it as every time he does have a calzone, he calls it something else and won't listen to people when they insist to him that it is just a calzone.
True Love is Exceptional: Chris comments that in the past, Ben has exclusively dated only tall brunettes, while the love of his life ends up being the short blonde Leslie.
Uptight Loves Wild: An arguably more Downplayed example than most. He's a stuffy, cynical, rational, rule-abiding state auditor and he falls for the energetic, incredibly optimistic, quirky, impulsive, and occasional rule-bending Parks director Leslie. They are eventually married and he loosens up considerably over the course of the series because of both her and Pawnee's influence. Funnily enough, in one of his very earliest interactions with Leslie, he inverts this: she is pissed at him for cutting the budget, but rather than confront her, he invites her for a beer even though it's 10:30 AM, and is frank with her about why he does what he does, which is the first moment where she starts to think he's more than just an Obstructive Bureaucrat.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: He's afraid of cops. Naturally, he's in utter hell in "Dave Returns", as he has to interact with a lot of them and either weirds them out or buckles under the pressure of trying to stay out of trouble.
Why Do You Keep Changing Jobs?: Introduced as a state auditor, he helps Leslie organize a fair to raise money for the town, then stays on as Chris' Deputy City Manager. He leaves in disgrace (his words) when his relationship with Leslie goes public, and becomes Leslie's campaign manager for her city council campaign. He then takes up a job offer from Jen Barkley managing a senator's campaign, but returns to Pawnee and ends up becoming a manager for the Sweetums' Charity Foundation until he's fired when Leslie speaks out against the company. He then takes over as City Manager when Chris leaves, and after the Time Skip, begins a bid to run for Congress. He's then offered a chance to run for governor, and in the Distant Finale, either he or Leslie is seemingly President/Vice President. And this is without all the times he takes the same accounting firm job only to leave immediately, in-between all those jobs; after Andy, he probably changes jobs the most, though he at least generally keeps it within the same general field of managerial/bureaucratic positions.
Workaholic: While not to the same extent as Leslie, he gets weird when he's left idle for too long. After getting fired from his job, Chris can immediately tell that he's "wildly, insanely" depressed despite how much Ben tries to deny it.
Young and in Charge: He was elected mayor of his town at only eighteen although given how he ended up bankrupting it and getting impeached only two months later, he prefers not to talk about it.