The Ace: Attractive, physically impressive, and a respected government employee. Donna even calls him the Bionic Man.
And Starring: Rob Lowe gets the "and" credit in the opening titles of the show.
Back for the Finale: He, Ann, and their son Oliver return in "One Last Ride" after their absence for the rest of the season.
Benevolent Boss: While an easygoing person as a whole, he's an incredibly competent government worker and takes his position very seriously. He's asked to temporarily fill in the City Manager position after the previous one is incapacitated by a heart attack because of his role in resolving the Pawnee budget crisis before taking the position permanently and openly admits that he refuses to play favorites in the government, but still endears himself to everyone regardless. He also makes the time to spend time with the Parks Department and listen to their problems if the need arises, but he isn't above reminding them of his authority when things absolutely need to get done.
[To Ron after he gets frustrated at the Parks BBQ]
Chris: The point of the barbeque was to thank the department. It was an employee appreciation barbeque. Ron, I gave you the chance to become assistant city manager, and you chose to stay here. Which is fine, but if you're going to lead the department, you're occasionally going to have to lead the department. And I say that as one of your closest colleagues, and dearest friends. [Beat] But also as your boss.
Beware the Nice Ones: There is a considerable amount of steel and determination underneath the peppy niceness:
In "The Trial Of Leslie Knope", Chris is beyond pissed to find out that Leslie and Ben have been secretly dating, and immediately launches an investigation. While he cares deeply for both of them (and, privately was a Shipper on Deck otherwise), he doesn't half-ass the investigation or trial to see if they did anything unethical.
During said trial, when Tammy Two is about to testify against Leslie, Chris makes it perfectly clear that he isn't going to abide by her lying under oath and she will be harshly punished if she tries. Tammy Two immediately recants her statements and leaves in a hurry.
When Jamm interrupted Leslie and Ben's wedding, he and Andy looked equally furious when Jamm insulted Leslie, both of them jumping to their feet simultaneously. The only reason why he didn't join Andy in beating the shit out of Jamm was because Ron beat them to it.
A more minor example, but when he and Ron walk into the Parks Department after instructing them to find a solution for the water fountain problem and find the department goofing around, Chris is less than pleased and can only muster genuine disappointment and a bitter, "I think you'll agree that this department could use a little leadership."
Birds of a Feather: When he was dating Garry's oldest daughter Millicent.
Breakout Character: He was originally only intended to appear in the last two episodes of Season 2 and the first six episodes of Season 3. However, after the positive critical reception of the character, Rob Lowe signed a multi-year contract and became a main cast member for several seasons.
Broken Ace: He's a hypochondriac, is shown to be unable to cope with the idea of being unhappy and his ultra-positivity often makes him unintentionally a jerk to others (i.e. his behavior toward Ann and Garry, as well as designating Ben the Bearer of Bad News).
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Despite his relentless optimism, his emotional troubles, and his many eccentricities, he is consistently shown to be a clear-eyed, cunning and capable administrator. He does make a handful of bad decisions right after becoming city manager, but if Ron is to be believed, this is par for the course every time the position changes hands, and Chris is insightful enough to know that rolling over on all of his decisions will undermine his credibility.
Catchphrase:
One of his strategies for making Ben seem like the bad guy instead of him involves variations of this. Turns into a Subverted Catchphrase when he tries to use it and Ben isn't in the room.
[Character complains about X]
Chris: Well, that's terrible! Is there anything we can do about that, Ben?
Ben: Uh, no.
Chris: Damn! [Hastens off the scene]
He tends to address characters by their full names (and pointing at them), particularly characters he likes, particularly Ann, to the point where "Ann Perkins!" becomes a catchphrase. He does it to Leslie as well, but less so.
He frequently uses the word "literally" (pronounced as litch-rally) in hyperbole, punctuating it for emphasis. "That is. Literally. The best news I've heard all day."
"I would like an X. I would like it to be Y. And I would like it to be Z." After he orders a drink this way at a restaurant, Ann riffs on it for her own drink order: "I would like some white wine. I would like it to be cold. And I would like it with one ice cube."
Chosen Conception Partner: When Ann goes looking for a sperm donor to father her child, she eventually chooses Chris. But after they get back together, they wind up making a baby the old-fashioned way.
Chronic Hero Syndrome: He has to help everyone he meets if they have a problem. Even if he has no idea what the problem is, he jumps straight in and tries to help them in any way he can. This eventually drives Ann to a breaking point during her pregnancy, wherein he learns that the best advice is just to sometimes say, "That sucks" and let her complain.
Cloudcuckoolander: The worst moment of this is probably when he breaks up with Ann through a feng shui metaphor so vague that she doesn't actually realize she's been dumped for a week.
Contrasting New Love Interest: Chris is actively looking for this when he starts dating Shauna Malwae-Tweep. Chris has always previously dated women similar to himself (or women who become similar to him after his personality rubs off on them, like Ann). However, he ultimately decides to expand his scope, and focus on someone who enjoys the important things. Shauna falls into this category, and Chris isn’t even fazed by the fact she likes red meat.
Even the Guys Want Him:
Andy states that Chris is the guy he would pick if "[he] had to pick a dude". Chris is rather flattered by this.
Jean Ralphio also acknowledges how handsome Chris is and seems open to the idea of a threesome with him and Ann. Again, Chris is flattered.
During a committee meeting on women in Government, Councilman Milton mistakes Chris for a woman, then calls him a "very pretty man". Once again, Chris is flattered.
Fitness Nut: Health-obsessed to an extreme, he considers a 10k run a "light" exercise, takes insane amounts of vitamins, and eats very carefully. This likely stems from the fact that he was a sickly baby who wasn't supposed to survive his early years.
Full-Name Basis: He greets everyone by pointing at them and saying their name.
Giving Someone the Pointer Finger: It's part of his usual greeting, but it's also what he does when he meets someone for the first time. It can be off-putting.
Ron: Hello, gents! Ron Swanson. [Reaches for a handshake)]
Chris: [Point] Ron... Swanson.
[Beat]
Ron: Okay.
Good Is Not Soft: Chris is a morally upstanding, friendly, and incredibly nice man who will lay down the law like no one's business. He takes his job seriously and forces everyone to stick to the rules he sets down, even Ben, his best friend. (Though he makes it clear he doesn't enjoy enforcing the "no office relationships" rule on Ben and Leslie, and would love to be doing anything else — but he can't play favorites.)
Granola Guy: Due to his health nut tendencies.
Hidden Depths: Chris rarely "poisons his body with dark alcohol", but considers Lagavulin to be excellent.
Hollywood Tone-Deaf: Revealed to be this in "Dave Returns". He doesn't know the words for "Take Me Out to the Ball Game", either.
Hypochondria: An extension of being born with a blood disease.
Hypocrite: In an early appearance, Chris is given the job of providing cake for April and Andy's fancy party. Instead he makes a vegetable loaf, on the grounds that it's healthier, which makes everyone visibly annoyed and almost makes Ron burst a blood vessel. Later, when Ron takes the job of organising the employee appreciation barbecue and ruins it with his BBQ purism and childish insistence on doing it the way he wants it, Chris is the one who gently points out to him the next day that the point of the barbecue was to thank the employees by giving them a good time (not, as Ron was doing, keep them waiting hours while the food cooks, and only offering beer to drink at a party attended by children), apparently unaware of the irony.
Iconic Sequel Character: One of the main characters who wasn't introduced until the end of season 2.
Although in a later episode he seems to understand that Ann is using sarcasm, but not that it's meant as a jab at him.
Innocently Insensitive: The downside to his constant need to help people is that he has a tendency to unintentionally impose his ideas onto other people and make things worse for them by trying to fix things that don't need fixing.
In Touch with His Feminine Side: His pink shower cap (from a breast cancer awareness triathlon), and he even has a leg razor. Chris sees none of this as anything to be ashamed of. He also doesn't see kissing Ron on his birthday as anything strange.
The Matchmaker: He expresses a fondness for this in "Jerry’s Painting" and endeavors to set Ben up with someone. Played for irony given his new rules are actually keeping Ben from the one person he's actually interested in.
Meat Versus Veggies: The veggie eater to Ron's meat eater.
Moment Killer: In "Road Trip" where (1) Ben confesses to Leslie at dinner; Leslie leaves for a moment to consult Ann and steels herself to go back and kiss Ben only to find that Chris has appeared and has seated himself at their table, and (2) Ben and Leslie get increasingly cute while watching TV together on the couch in Chris' hotel room and Chris keeps interrupting with his frequent bathroom trips.
Mr. Fanservice: He is regularly described as being superhumanly attractive by other characters, and constantly wears tight-fitting clothing or goes shirtless.
Nice Guy: While his overly cheerful personality sometimes leads to unintentional Jerkass moments, Chris is overall a very well-meaning man who implements a health initiative out of a genuine desire to improve the health of the citizens of Pawnee. He is also friendly and polite to almost everyone. An excellent example of his niceness occurs during Ben's bachelor party when he finds out none of the other guys got to have their own bachelor parties for various reasons. His response? He gives everyone the perfect bachelor party they never got to have.
No Social Skills: An odd case. While he's incredibly outgoing and charismatic, he manages to be so outgoing and charismatic that it wraps around to making everything he says come off as stilted and strange. He basically operates on a level beyond the average person socially.
Odd Friendship: With Ron. Chris and Ron are almost complete opposites personality wise. However, the two are perfectly capable to find common ground and do not tolerate insubordination from people lightly. Ron is often annoyed by Chris's vegetarian lifestyle and relentless optimism, but admires his honesty and dedication to his health. Chris can be annoyed with Ron's libertarian beliefs, but does respect him as a person and will listen to Ron on matters he knows he doesn't have enough expertise about.
Official Couple: With Ann as of Season 6.
Older Than They Look: He's forty-four. The most common in-universe estimate is twenty-five.
One-Steve Limit: Averted. In "The Set-Up" before he was introduced, Ann set Leslie up with a colleague named Chris (see Leslie's profile — he's the guy who gave her the MRI).
Parody Sue: His extreme physical perfection and relentless positivity is often played for humor, in that most people can't really relate to him.
The Pollyanna:
So positive, he scares off Orin, the creepy and morbid Goth at April and Andy's wedding. When he was born with a deadly, rare blood disease, the doctors told his parents he would only live for a few months. That's why he is so positive!
Deconstructed towards seasons 3 and 4. When it becomes inevitable for him to feel bad things, his constant positive attitude becomes a problem because he is just not ready mentally to deal with that properly.
Principles Zealot: He will not budge on or bend the rules, even if he would personally like to. He hates the fact that he has to investigate Ben and Leslie's relationship in "The Trial of Leslie Knope" and genuinely wants them to get off scot-free, but he refuses to half-ass the investigation and does it to the best of his ability.
Promotion to Opening Titles: In season 3, along with Ben.
Punch-Clock Villain: Unfortunately becomes one in "The Trial of Leslie Knope". He refuses to back down on the rule of "no office relationships" to investigate and punish Leslie and Ben to the full extent of his ability. However, he also fully admits to not enjoying having to do this, is noticeably stressed out by it, and is openly happy it didn't uncover anything worse.
He also holds his own witnesses high standards standards, even if they are willing to perjure themselves to win him the case. In the case of Tammy 2, he reminds her that she will be under oath and that if she lies, he will find out, have her charged, and then fire her. She quickly recants that she has evidence that will prove Leslie and Ben did things that were unethical and leaves the courthouse immediately.
Pure Is Not Good: His exceedingly healthy body, which he compares to a finely-tuned microchip, is more than once played as a weakness. When he catches the flu, it hits him like a truck.
Chris: Stop... pooping...
Put on a Bus: He was first put on for a brief time in Season 3 when he went back to Indianapolis but then came back after the Harvest Festival. He and Ann then leave together in the middle of Season 6 to start their family.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He becomes this, pointing out to Ron after the debacle of the family barbecue that the point of the barbecue was to thank the employees for their hard work (the implication being that Ron's determination to show off his meat-cooking skills, and his hissy fit when everyone kept complaining that it was taking too long, were inappropriate). He was also appointed as acting City Manager for Pawnee during the financial crisis, and it was a position he held for longer than expected.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Red to Ben's Blue.
Sarcasm-Blind:
Chris: It is exactly because of that lewd photo that I am here. [...] If I could go back in time and cut your eyeballs out, I would.
April: Wow, that is so sweet.
Chris: Thank you.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The sensitive guy to Ron's manly man.
Sickly Child Grew Up Strong: Chris is obsessed with exercise and healthy living, and is inhumanly good shape as a result. This is in part because he had a rare disease as a newborn that he wasn't expected to survive.
Stealth Hi/Bye: Does this periodically, usually with his trademark happy smile.
Stepford Smiler: Type A.
Chris: If I keep my body moving and my mind occupied at all times, I will avoid falling into a bottomless pit of despair.
In "The Trial of Leslie Knope", he's so anxious and depressed about Leslie's trial that he loads up on herbal remedies in a way that is creepily reminiscent of a drug addict. Leslie notes he looks like he's radiating pure joy, but that's because he's trying to stay his upbeat self.
Other episodes show that he has crippling issues about his mortality that he barely manages to cover up. It's really the only reason he's such a health nut. He begins spiraling into depression when his break-up with Millicent and Ann's (apparent) moving on with Tom makes him wonder if he'll just end up alone.
Straw Vegetarian: While he does eat meat, his health nut tendencies are usually focused on getting away from red meat and he's treated the same as a Straw Vegetarian. On multiple occasions, he's shown thinking various plants are reasonable alternatives to meat. Most telling is when he wanted to remove hamburgers from the commissary. He bet Ron he could make a turkey burger better than a hamburger. When they had the cook-off, Chris slaved over his burgers with the finest ingredients. Ron slapped ground beef on a grill. Ron won in a landslide because beef is just better. Even Chris was 100 percent convinced. Though in a slight twist, it wasn't that Chris's fancy turkey burgers were bad (the judges were in love with them), beef burgers were just that much better.
Terrified of Germs: During flu season:
Chris: (increasingly frantic) I have to get out of here. I have 2.8 percent body fat. My body's like a microchip. A grain of sand could destroy it. My body's a microchip. (leaves)
Too Much Information: Chris has a habit of being very direct and honest with people. This sometimes results in him saying things that would probably be better left unsaid, like telling female colleagues when they've done something he finds arousing. For example, while dating Milly, Chris insisted on including Garry in his courtship out of respect for him as her father. This includes telling Garry whenever Milly slept over at Chris' house.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: When Chris first appears in Season 2, he quickly falls for Ann, who had just broken up with Mark (and had lingering feelings toward her other ex-boyfriend Andy) and is not interested. After pursuing her for some time, she eventually reciprocates and they date for a while in Season 3. When they break up, Ann spends the next several episodes trying to get over Chris while he has already moved on. Later on, around the middle of Season 4, Chris begins to have feelings for Ann again and spends the rest of the season depressed over her on-and-off relationship with Tom. Then in Season 5, Chris starts dating news reporter Shauna Malwae-Tweep and Ann (who has broken up with Tom for good by that point) becomes jealous.
Weaksauce Weakness: He's built his body to perfection. Unfortunately, that also means that his body is sensitive to things that most people aren't too worried about. He gets hit hard by the flu, and he has to constantly replenish electrolytes. And his body's tolerances are so tight that he has to go to the bathroom twelve times a night.