The Ace: When it comes to being a civil servant, Leslie is virtually unmatched. Her hyper-competence at organizing, leading and working on large scale and complicated projects on extremely short notice is more or less the only thing that allows anything to be accomplished at all in Pawnee. At one point Leslie has to take time off and the entire rest of the department is unable to pick up her slack. Outside of her profession, while much less flawless, she is still generally a smart, charismatic and capable person.
Aesop Amnesia: No matter how often Leslie realizes she needs to stop being a control freak, she's back to making the same mistakes in the next episode.
Afraid of Needles: To the point of making a Precision F-Strike against Ann.
All-Loving Hero: Edging closer to this trope as her Determinator qualities make her more and more effective.
Ambition Is Evil: Defied. Leslie is extremely ambitious (just read the above quotation), but she is also very moral. In some episodes, she is presented with an immoral way to achieve one of her goals and considers using it, but ultimately she ends up feeling guilty and doesn't go through with it.
Animal Motifs: It's never pointed out, but Leslie has a number of owl-themed knick-knacks around her office.
Badass Bureaucrat: Not immediately obvious, but her ability to consistently go up against impossible odds and succeed almost every time is jaw-dropping. The primary reason Ron respects her despite their conflicting worldviews is her absolute refusal to compromise her ideals regardless of how much adversity she faces.
Bad Liar: Honest to a fault, Leslie's rare attempts at subterfuge invariably fall flat. In many cases, she ends up ratting herself out.
Beleaguered Bureaucrat:
This becomes especially apparent in "Christmas Scandal", where it's shown that her duties are so numerous that the combined efforts of all six of her coworkers can't get the job done.
Her over-extension is given attention again in "Sweet Sixteen", where Ron states that she's been pulling 100 hours a week trying to give equal attention to her job and her city council campaign. Throughout the episode, she keeps making minor blunders due to neglecting something from either side of her professional life. At the end of the episode, she decides to reduce her time at her day job to ten hours per week.
Berserk Button:
Do not feed J.J.'s waffles to your dog around Leslie.
Do not remind her she was born in Eagleton
Do not question why Li'l Sebastian is awesome.
Beware the Nice Ones: Despite her overall positive and cheerful demeanor, she is not a pushover and she can get extremely angry when people push her too far. When this happens it usually falls upon Ron or Ann to calm her down.
Ron: Leslie, what do we do when we get this angry?
Leslie: [deep sigh] We count backward from a thousand by sevens and think of warm brownies.
Big Eater: When it comes to waffles, whipped cream, sugar, or all of the above, Leslie's essentially a bottomless pit.
Big Good: It takes her a few seasons to grow into it, but towards the end of the series, even the more cynical of her friends and coworkers tend to regard Leslie as a powerful force for positive change in the world.
Big, Stupid Doodoo-Head:
She'll resort to childish insults like this when she's really frustrated.
She subverts it rather nicely in "Meet 'n' Greet":
Leslie: I don't like to throw around the word "butthead", because it loses its impact when you say "butthead" too much. But I can say without hesitation that Tom is being a real dick.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: She's very good at her job, and probably should have Ron's. On the other hand, she is also an extremely eccentric Woman Child.
Can't Get Away with Nuthin': Leslie's entire time on the city council is characterized by merciless public and media attention on her specifically, despite nearly all of her fellow city councilors being either obviously corrupt, senile, or in a years-long rolling sex scandal. This is ascribed to both the leeway men in office are given that is often denied to women, and that Leslie is at odds with Pawnee's biggest industry, Sweetums.
Characterization Marches On:
It can mostly be chalked up to Early-Installment Weirdness, but first season Leslie was something of a Pointy-Haired Boss in the vein of Michael Scott. In Season 2, she became much less obnoxious, and more of a hyper-competent, upbeat Pollyanna.
In a deleted scene from "Park Safety", she mentions her dislike of miniature horses, calling them "weird". This obviously predates the introduction of Lil' Sebastian in Season 3.
Cloudcuckoolander: She is a bit... quirky, to say the least.
Contrasting New Love Interest: Leslie is suggested to be this to Ben. Chris comments that Ben has previously almost exclusively dated tall brunettes, whereas Leslie is short and blonde. This relationship, however, is the one that sticks.
Cool Big Sis: To Andy and April. She seems to view April as a surrogate little sister, and frequently encourages her and tries to keep her out of trouble (and continually overestimates how innocent April actually is), and she helps Andy get his life back on track after finding out he was living in the pit. April makes fun of her but eventually softens up enough to admit she does love Leslie, while Andy openly thinks Leslie is awesome and acknowledges that he owes her a lot.
The Cutie: She expresses her love of cute things in a variety of ways. One episode's plot was based around her officiating the marriage of two penguins because "it was cute".
Determinator: If there's something that needs doing, Leslie will find a way to do it, no matter what.
Best exemplified by her masterful oration of her speech intended to attract sponsors for the Harvest Festival in "Flu Season". All while she was near delirious with the flu, and quickly reverted to sickness-induced delirium during a short Q&A session.
This is Leslie's great weakness as well as her strength. In many episodes the conflict can be summarized as 'Leslie's friends have to convince her that she can't change a situation she considers unacceptable.' Of course, she is so hypercompetent that she frequently finds ways to improve the situation anyway. Summarized nicely in "Smallest Park" when Ann interrupts Leslie's complaints about how unfair it is to call her a steamroller:
Ann: You're a steamroller! You're a massive, enormous, runaway steamroller with no brakes and a cement brick on the gas pedal!
Detrimental Determination: Though her single-minded ability to smash through problems no matter how frustrating are handy when up against political bureaucracy, it can also lead her to infringe on her friend's and loved ones wants in favour of her own.
Ben: I mean, sometimes when we disagree, you're so passionate, I feel like I'm arguing with the sun.
Distaff Counterpart: Back in the first season, she might as well have been "Michael Scott in a skirt", but she became more her own character later on. Unlike Michael Scott, she is not only good at her job but totally deserved to have been promoted into it.
Does Not Like Spam: Hates salad with a passion. Or other disgusting things.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: While government work is often thankless, Leslie often laments that Pawnee never appreciates the work she does to improve their lives, instead often treating her with scorn or derision.
Eating the Eye Candy: Probably the sweetest case of this trope ever. Not since Gomez Addams will you find someone on television so turned on by their spouse's attractiveness. In particular, Leslie has an obsession with Ben's butt.
Emotional Regression: Leslie becomes proportionately more irrational the more estranged she is from her emotional anchors, Ann and Ron. Nowhere is this more apparent than when Ann moves away in Season 6, and Leslie backslides almost to her Season 1 self before snapping out of it.
Even the Loving Hero Has Hated Ones:
She cannot stand April's friend Orin, finding him weird and creepy, and constantly mocking him to his face.
Likewise she despises Greg Pikitis, whom she considers her Arch-Enemy.
Expository Hairstyle Change:
Wears a small, very tight French braid in her hair curving around the top of her head in "Jerry's Painting", apparently because she takes very well to being compared to a Greek goddess.
She gains another new hairstyle later on to emphasize the Time Skip, but she quickly reverts to her original hairdo a few episodes into Season 7.
Fangirl:
When it comes to Harry Potter. She made her best friend Ann watch all eight movies even though Ann doesn't like Harry Potter.
She's also a huge fangirl for Joe Biden and most prominent American women in politics, to the point of covering the walls of her office with their pictures. She's also a type of geek rarely portrayed in the media, the government-policy wonk.
She's also a fangirl of Jennifer Aniston, believing that she deserves to find romantic happiness and having a "Team Aniston" patch sewn on one of her blazers. And naturally, in connection to that, she's also a huge fan of Friends.
Fatal Flaw:
Selfishness. Although Leslie's best quality is that she'll always do what she thinks is right and help others, she has to be reminded that not everyone shares her personal views and just because she can help someone, it doesn't mean she should. Leslie will try her best to help people but she often ignores what that person really wants her to do for them. "Smallest Park" focuses on this flaw, as Leslie ignores Ben's insistence that they put some distance between them to deal with their break-up better, much to Ben's annoyance. Ann has to call her out on it.
Ann: You're a steamroller! You're a massive, enormous, runaway steamroller with no brakes and a cement brick on the gas pedal! [...] You do what you want, you ignore what other people want, and you hear only what you want to hear!
Her idealistic view of Pawnee. Despite it being clear that Pawnee is a Wretched Hive run by corrupt corporations, bigots, and Insufferable imbeciles, Leslie refuses to stop viewing the town with rose-tinted glasses and accept that most of the townspeople dislike her and won't accept the policies she wants to push through. It takes Jen Barkley to make Leslie finally see that she's wasting her time trying to enact change through the town's government and that she needs to seek higher office so she can do it at a level where she's not impeded by Pawnee's corrupt politics.
Foil: To Michael Scott. Both are endearingly kooky, Innocently Insensitive, and deceptively clever managers who essentially act as an In-Universe Manic Pixie Dream Girl/Guy to their colleagues, shoving a spotlight onto whatever topic is currently being focused on, and also have varying levels of Attention Whore traits (Michael obviously more so than Leslie). However, that's where their similarities end; Michael is a brunette Jerk with a Heart of Gold with No Social Skills who has been promoted far past his original position of competence, while Leslie is a blonde Nice Girl who's surprisingly good at being a Guile Hero and who serves (ostensibly, as she's Ron's inferior for the first few seasons) as her department's Hyper-Competent Sidekick. Furthermore, both can be incredibly arrogant, but this manifests in different ways, with Michael ultimately being an Extreme Doormat who is obsessed with gaining the admiration of his peers, while Leslie is a "steamroller" who often shoves past the opinions of others and ultimately learns the need to take others' outlooks into account.
Genki Girl: Endlessly upbeat and cheerful, to the point that it tires people like Ron and April out.
Gleeful and Grumpy Pairing: The Gleeful to Ron's Grumpy. Leslie is incredibly enthusiastic and outgoing, while Ron is reserved and usually in a surly mood.
Glurge Addict: Mildly. She really likes cute things, but not to an annoying degree.
Leslie: Scientifically, hummingbirds are the world's cutest animals. I mean, they're so small, they have tiny beaks and they only eat sugar water. I mean, what beats that? Come on. Baby monkeys in diapers? Yeah... they do. Baby monkeys in diapers are the cutest.
Go-Getter Girl: Has the ambitious, driven personality down pat.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: Despite her very ambitious nature, Leslie is extremely nice and many of her goals are motivated by caring for her friends and the citizens of Pawnee.
Happily Married: To Ben after Season 5. They're loving and supportive of one another and never get jealous of the other's accomplishments.
Hero with Bad Publicity: Leslie can and will accomplish great things in the name of Pawnee, but the townspeople rarely give her the acknowledgment or recognition she deserves, and criticize her more often than not.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: Leslie and Ann are best friends and are always supporting each other. Leslie constantly comments on Ann's attractiveness and sometimes speaks to her in a flirtatious way. They're also occasionally mistaken for a lesbian couple.
Rachel Lerpiss: Are you a couple?
Leslie Knope: No. Tragically, we are both heterosexual.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: A rare example of the lead character fitting this trope. This suits her boss just fine.
The Idealist: She rarely considers consequences and realistic probability before jumping into action.
Immigrant Patriotism: During her campaign, Leslie is stunned to learn that she was actually born in Eagleton, not Pawnee, partly because she hates Eagleton and partly because most of the voters hate Eagleton. As she thinks about it further, though, she realizes that it's the choice to continue living in and trying to improve Pawnee that really matters, and manages to communicate that to the voters. (Also, you know, the reason she was born in Eagleton was that although her parents lived in Pawnee, Pawnee's hospital was overrun with raccoons at the time, and Eagleton's hospital was the only one nearby that was in a reasonably good state.)
Innocently Insensitive: Many times, she is so passionate about projects and helping her friends that she ignores other people's feelings or desires such as when she plans out April's entire parks career path even though the latter has decided she wants to try something else.
Ironic Name: "Knope" is the perfect name for an Obstructive Bureaucrat... except that Leslie is as far from an Obstructive Bureaucrat as you can get.
Irony: Leslie knows everything about everyone, including the notoriously private Ron Swanson. Despite this, she's among the last to learn his secret identity, Duke Silver. Adding further irony is the fact that the more oblivious Tom and Andy are among the first to know, while April was likely the first of all of them to learn and didn't care enough to bring it up.
Jerkass Ball: Related to her Immigrant Patriotism above, she tends to act like a jerk when it comes to dealing with Eagleton, even if the Eagletonians she's dealing with are actually nice people like Wreston St. James the park architect.
The Knights Who Say "Squee!": To Michelle Obama, among others.
Mad Libs Catchphrase:
Leslie: It's every girl's dream to [something incredibly wonky, obscure and/or over-specific]!
Leslie: Ann, you [insert strangely condescending comment that compliments her beauty but points out her naïveté]!
My Way or the Highway: As Ann points out in "Smallest Park", Leslie is a "steamroller" who always does what she wants and refuses to hear any and all criticism of her actions because she's always convinced that she's right and everyone else needs to follow her lead. Many times it leads to disaster.
Nice Girl: Despite her faults, Leslie is overall a very kindhearted person who constantly does nice things for her friends and goes out of her way to help others. Ron puts it best when he says, "Leslie has a lot of qualities I find horrifying, but the worst one by far is how thoughtful she can be." This very trope is also one of the reasons why she is so successful and accomplishes so much. Time and again, it is shown that everyone who knows her is willing to do anything to help her out, because she is always so kind. The Chief of Police will happily agree to assign his officers to work extra shifts for the Harvest Festival (describing Leslie as someone who uses favors to help others), airport baggage handlers will cheerfully destroy a bag containing embarrassing footage of Leslie being interviewed while drunk, businesses will stay open late or open early or even open on days when they're supposed to be closed, Ron will commit assault and battery without a second thought on anyone who insults her, Tom will stay up all night making a genuinely touching and heartfelt campaign film for her, etc. Hell, even Ken Hotate, who usually just sees dollar signs when he looks at a white person, will always have Leslie's back, although he can't resist some good-natured teasing of her while he's at it. The great thing is, most of the time these things are done without Leslie asking, people just do it because they care about her.
Number Two: Officially, she is this to Ron, but she actually does all the work.
Oblivious to Love: Initially, regarding Ben's interest in her.
Odd Friendship: She's probably Ron's closest friend, despite being his total opposite.
Official Couple: With Ben in Season 3.
The Paragon: Leslie lives to help other people, and is incredibly kind and caring. Her influence also encourages the other characters to be better — Ron becomes more willing to let people into his life, April becomes more driven, Tom becomes more mature, Ben loosens up a bit, and Ann learns to stand up for herself. Hell, she's so nice that some people in Pawnee will bend or outright break the rules to help her out and do the right thing.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Ron. She knows more about Ron than anyone, at least before Diane came along.
Plucky Girl: The absolute poster girl for the trope. She expects the best and always goes the extra mile.
The Pollyanna: Relentlessly positive, sunny, and full of can-do spirit.
Pop-Cultural Osmosis Failure: She appears to be under the impression that Game of Thrones is a Space Opera.
Pungeon Master: Most definitely this. Notable examples include her topsoil brochure "Mulch Ado About Nothing" and the rules she instated at the Farmer's Market (like "Peas be kind to others" and "In case of fire, romaine calm"). In her words, she hates vegetables but is really good at vegetable puns.
Real Women Never Wear Dresses: Leslie is a competent golfer and hunter, and she almost always dresses in a masculine manner, but considering that appearing to be 'too feminine' is a concern for women in the real world for business and politics, this is very much a Justified Trope.
Running Gag:
She has a ghastly dating record of meeting the most awful guys and being put in the most embarrassing situations by past partners. She often brings it up as a joke.
Leslie also has a severe hatred of libraries.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Energetic girl to Ben's savvy guy.
Screw the Rules, I'm Doing What's Right!: Deconstructed. One of Leslie's strongest virtues is that she will do what she thinks is right, regardless of what people tell her. However, it's shown multiple times that it has caused problems for her; she is narrowly elected to the City Council — she wins by a single-digit quantity of votes. She immediately fights for what she believes in (very loudly), pushes legislation she believes in, and ignores criticism from the townspeople, claiming she "knows better". She constantly fought her fellow council members and ignored voters, resulting in Leslie getting recalled after a well-funded campaign targets her due to her actions. Ron even reveals to Leslie that he tried to have her fired four times because she either ignored his orders or went behind his back to do whatever she wanted. Well-intentioned or not, Leslie's actions were textbook insubordination because Ron was still her boss in their workplace hierarchy and she needed to follow his orders, even if she disagreed with his methods.
Shipper on Deck:
She zigzags this, when she finds out that Andy and April are going to get married, stating that while she wants them to be together forever, she is worried that them getting married after being together for a month and tries to stop the wedding. The attempt fails, but Andy and April stay together for the rest of the series and beyond.
In the finale when she sees her daughter Sonia and Ann's son Oliver getting close, she gets very excited at the thought of them falling in love together.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: She ends up married to the kind and intelligent Ben.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: While the Parks Department has a bitter rivalry with the Public Library, Leslie seems to despise them the most.
Small Name, Big Ego: Downplayed. She's not full of herself, but she's convinced that her municipal government job is much more important than it really is. She also has no doubt that she will one day be president of the United States. In a flash-forward to 2048, she and Ben are depicted as having a Secret Service detail, implying that she apparently did indeed become President (although the episode does leave the possibility open it's Ben). She definitely became Governor of Indiana—and apparently, the first female one too (she's apparently elected in 2020—IN elects in the same year as the President—and the only somewhat likely circumstance in which Indiana's governor is a woman before then is if the winner of the 2016 race dies, resigns, or is removed before 2020 (both major parties nominated women for Lieutenant Governor).
Sweet Tooth: She puts sugar on pasta.
To Be Lawful or Good: Time after time, Leslie will encounter situations where the problem at hand could be easily solved if she just broke the laws that she so values.
Trademark Favorite Food: She piles whipped cream onto everything (during "Pie-mary", Ben specifically gets her two canisters of whipped cream: one to put on the pies, one to spray directly into her mouth). She also loves Belgian waffles, specifically the ones from JJ's Diner.
Weirdness Magnet: Somewhat. She's seldom had a 'normal' date — something extremely outlandish happens, or the date himself is outlandish. Incidents include a blazing dress, an Ambien overdose, a date sticking his hand in her mouth as she slept, and an MRI.note  As far as we've seen, Dave and Ben are the only men she's dated without some kind of off-putting quirk or glaring character flaw.
What the Hell Is That Accent?: Happens whenever she tries to do an accent or an imitation.
White Guilt: Shows occasional signs of this, especially when dealing with Ken Hotate, the local Native American leader, who likes to invoke Everything Is Racist cheerfully to provoke this reaction and get his way. She largely outgrows it in later interactions with him, especially when they team up against genuinely nasty characters.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Much to Ron's endless annoyance, and failed attempts to beat it out of her. It does get tested, but she largely remains an optimistic person.
Womanchild: Leslie is cheerful, hyperactive, and a little naïve. Not to mention her fondness for candy and dislike of vegetables (though she did happily eat the cucumber rose garnish Chris made because it was cute). She is competent, however — indeed, very competent.
Ann: [in a deleted scene] Leslie is incredible. She has the energy of a ten-year-old. And the same taste in snacks.
Workaholic: In "Camping", Ron has to lock her in a hotel room with nothing to do so she can actually get some much-needed rest because she's overworking herself so hard. The next morning, she excitedly says that she slept seven hours, which is about twice as long as she normally does. Hell, in "Citizen Knope" she attempts to steal some work from the office to do at home during her paid suspension.