Always Second Best: He has a sort of inferiority complex for Ron, which comes to a boiling point in "Go Big or Go Home".
Ambitious, but Lazy: Epitomises Tom Haverford, who constantly has big dreams of expanding out from his mid-level local government post and breaking into the glamorous and highly paid worlds of media marketing, celebrity culture, and high-end style. However, despite possessing some legitimate talent and expertise in networking, PR, event planning, and style, Tom is at heart a lazy guy who prefers to goof off and focuses most of his efforts on finding ways to do the least work whilst still receiving the most credit. Thus his early business ventures and attempts fail (sometimes quite spectacularly i.e. his Entertainment 720 see's him blowing millions on flashy and pointless expenses, whilst only figuring out what the company actually could do right before they go bankrupt) due to his attempts at taking shortcuts, prioritising the exciting parts over the essential or getting distracted and simply not bothering to put the actual work in. His arc throughout the series sees him slowly outgrowing these tendencies and working towards becoming a successful businessman, though it's not till near the end he fully succeeds in moving past his inherited instincts to slack off.
Aside Glance: While Ben is more associated with the classic "snarky/confused" face to camera, Tom has his own "happy/excited" version.
Beta Couple: With his former ex, Lucy, in Season 7. While it's not confirmed, it's implied they get married in the future after he proposed the episode before.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: After the Entertainment 720 arc, he evolves into this. He's still immature, superficial and goofy, but when it comes to marketing, style, PR, and advertising techniques, he knows what he's talking about.
Butt-Monkey: Defaults into this after Garry's retirement, before revealing to Ron that he was the "Jerry" at his old job before moving to Pawnee and reinventing himself.
Camp Straight: Despite his Handsome Lech personality, he invests in a gay bar, wears pink shirts, and drinks stereotypical 'girly' drinks. Leslie lampshades this in "Pawnee Zoo":
Leslie: Okay, so I know you're not gay.
Tom: No, I'm not.
Leslie: But you're very effeminate.
Tom: What?
Leslie: Well, you're wearing a shirt with a coiled snake on it.
Can't Hold His Liquor:
Tom is a lightweight (literally he's short, giving him less body mass for the alcohol to be distributed over) which is a point of contrast between him and the much larger Ron, who can hold his liquor excellently.
Detlef Schrempf: He had two beers. Light beers.
Oddly, in what may be an Out-of-Character Moment, he isn't shown to be terribly intoxicated by his invention Snakejuice, which has terrible aftereffects for the rest of the cast (especially Ron). Though he still ends up drunk.
Casanova Wannabe: Sometimes to the point of real pathos.
Cerebus Retcon: In "Jerry's Retirement", his reveal that he was the 'Jerry' of his previous office casts a darker, more pathetic light on his bullying of Garry. Given that Tom bullied Garry more than anyone else, this reveal implies he picked on Garry so much because he was desperate to keep Garry at the bottom of the office totem pole lest the antagonism is directed to him, and after previously being bullied so much himself, jumped at the chance to be the bully for a change. This becomes clear when Garry retires and, while everyone is cautious about becoming the "new Jerry", Tom goes to such careful extents to avoid it he just ends up making himself become the "new Jerry". He goes through great lengths to try and find someone else to be the "Jerry" (first Andy, then an intern), but this just makes him look more pathetic and desperate.
Character Development: Over the seasons, he becomes more mature, confident, and self-reliant.
Characterization Marches On: Season 1 Tom is far more straitlaced, with only a few of the quirks he'd have later on, with most of the humor around him being focused on his South Asian heritage and being Leslie's Number Two. Season 2 added in the love of style, ramped up the perverted aspects and gave him far more screen time with other characters.
Chivalrous Pervert: Is actually the one to tell Ben they should make sure a drunken Joan Callamezzo gets safely home from lunch with them.
Citizenship Marriage: His first wife Wendy. Despite him being brown-skinned and her being white, she was the one who needed the green card. She's Canadian.
The Dandy: He has a full-sized room for a closet and explicitly states that he wears pink for the sake of "peacocking".
Deadpan Snarker: With a much greater emphasis on 'snarker'; there is little 'deadpan' about Tom.
Didn't See That Coming: Tom's Bistro ends up being one of his greatest successes, to the point where by the finale, he's exploring franchising. Opening twenty locations was ambitious, but Ben, Ron, and Donna all said his numbers and projections looked solid. The restaurants went under because the country ran out of beef and the stock market crashed.
Easily Forgiven: Especially in earlier seasons, no matter what Tom would do, he would always get off with a slap on the wrist at most. The worst offender would have to be what he does in "Hunting Trip." Unlike his other antics, which are mostly harmless, if hurtful, here, Tom is extremely reckless with loaded firearms: he goes on a hunting trip without a license, accidentally shoots Ron in the back of the head because he didn't bother checking his field of fire, and then, in an attempt distract everyone from the question of who shot Ron, opens fire on someone else and almost kills them. Then he lets Leslie take the fall for him. He gets off with Ron calling him a moron a couple of times when he could have killed someone, and should have gotten a hefty fine at least, and probably jail time.
Hypocrite: In "Jerry's Retirement," Tom spins a sympathetic story about how before he moved to the Parks and Rec. department, he was the "Jerry" of his old office, which is why he reinvented himself. The only problem is, instead of making him more sympathetic, it only makes his treatment of Garry, which is by far the cruelest, that much more horrible because he should know how it feels to be on the receiving end.
Hypocritical Humor: Despite his obsession with being trendy and stylish, he is repeatedly shown to be woefully out of touch with what is actually trendy and stylish.
Informed Attribute: His good-heartedness. He has shown lots of selfish and unethical behavior throughout the series, with very little improvement, and his efforts to fix the damage always seem a bit self-serving. He does get better when his Character Development kicks in.
Insecure Love Interest: His relationship with Ann ended up being brief as he felt she was out of his league, leading him to obnoxiously broadcast it to everyone until she inevitably got sick of it and broke up with him.
It's All About Me: Has a big, big problem with this. It's on full display in "Meet 'N' Greet", where he turns an event for Leslie to get to know local business owners into an investment pitch for his company Entertainment 720. While he did it because E720 was bankrupt and he was desperate for funds, it also wasn't particularly out of character.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: As Leslie puts it, "Tom Haverford is a selfish, sleazy, self-promoting, good-hearted, secretly kind and wonderful tiny, little person."
Lovable Coward: He's more of a wimp than a coward (Ron once equated hurting Tom with hurting a defenseless child), but the lovable part holds true both ways.
Manchild: Seems to have the mentality of a fifteen-year-old boy.
Mock Millionaire: Comes up often but particularly emphasized during the Entertainment 720 arc, when he and Jean-Ralphio carelessly spent money on buying excessive props and hiring attractive women as surplus employees while not doing any actual work or generating revenue for their company.
Naturalized Name: His birth name is Darwish Sabir Ismael Gani, but he changed it since he thought "brown people with funny-sounding Muslim names" didn't have a chance in politics. He admits this reason is Hilarious in Hindsight after Barack Obama.
The Nicknamer: Does this frequently, at least in the earlier seasons, particularly to Ron.
Odd Friendship: Andy and Ben are both about as far from him personality-wise as possible, each for very different reasons, but he hangs out with both of them a lot. A later episode even shows that he considers them more of his true friends than the almost identical Jean-Ralphio.
Pet the Dog: After Leslie tears up the Venezuelans' check in "Sister City", Tom secretly takes all the tips he earned making himself the Venezuelans' errand boy and donates it all toward the park fund.
A meta example: Many of Tom's traits that were presented as failings in early seasons, traits that have been previously used as a joke, wind up in later seasons becoming strenghts- enabling him to strive towards his goals. His vanity ensures he keeps up with the latest fashion trends, his size allows him to rent his stylish clothes to middle school students, and his drive ensures that no matter how many times he fails, he keeps trying. Rent-a-Swag may have failed, but it shows that he is business-savvy enough to find a niche in the market and exploit it, and though that venture eventually failed, it succeeded long enough for him to snowball into a successful and fulfilled businessman. One can't help but feel that the writers decided that Tom deserved a reward for his sheer perseverance.
Popularity Polynomial: In-Universe: Finds himself the victim of this compared to Ben in the episode "Prom". His taste in music is out of touch with high school students, while Ben just played classic rock.
Preppy Name: Somewhat subverted. His full legal name is Thomas Montgomery Haverford, but A: he usually just goes by Tom, and B: it's not even his actual birth name.
Pretty Fly for a White Guy: Indian variation. At one point, Tom mentions having carefully cultivated a Jay-Z vibe and once dressed up as the rapper T-Pain for Halloween. He's also fond of using the slang term "boo" to refer to a significant other.
Schemer: He's always involved in some plan or invention to get fabulously wealthy, but none of them works, until the bistro, which lasts for several years until it goes under. Then he writes a massively successful self-help book by drawing on his past experiences.
Self-Deprecation: Will not deny that he rides others' coattails.
Tom: Behind every successful man is me: smiling and taking partial credit.
Serious Business: You will never acquire his thinking PJs. Or his YouTube blazer. Non-negotiable.
Small Name, Big Ego: Full force. He thinks of himself as a suave and sophisticated Renaissance Man but the things he considers cool and stylish are actually a lot more niche than he realizes.
Spear Counterpart: As a young, South Asian-American with a large ego and an obsession with celebrity culture, Tom is a more sympathetic male version of Kelly Kapoor.
Stylistic Suck: Personified in-universe. Tom luxuriates in all things flashy and tackily unsophisticated (VIP areas, brightly coloured cocktails, stretch limousines, ludicrous gadgetry, Paul Walker movies) yet has no idea how ghastly his taste-level actually is.
This Is for Emphasis, Bitch!: Tom gets ready to shoot a crow in "Hunting Trip"
Tom: Look, some kinda bird! Let's kill it! [shouts] You talkin' to me, bitch?!
Took a Level in Badass: After his failure with Entertainment 720, he successfully manages to run a small suit-rental business before being bought out by a competitor. After returning to work in the City Government, he creates the position of Business Liaison to help bring outside businesses to Pawnee, impressing Ron and Leslie. It's particularly noticeable in "Flouride", where he successfully used his own talent for marketing to beat Councilman Jamm at his own game.
Took a Level in Kindness: It takes a while and isn't always obvious, but he becomes way nicer as time goes on.