Abusive Parents: Her preferred method of parenting her kids is slapping the hell out of them at the drop of a hat. When Walt and Larry were just toddlers, she used them as human shields during Farnsworth's explosive demonstration of dark matter. While she was breastfeeding them, even.
Arms Dealer: She's been known to weaponize adorable children's toys and sell them. Somehow, this also doesn't impact her public image. But it did ruin her relationship with the Professor.
Professor: Ten feet, fifteen feet, what does it matter?
Mom: You should see the new sixteen foot models!
Professor: SIXTEEN FEET? Go to Hell! I was a fool to think you'd changed!
Bad Boss: Generally tends to fire employees by having them physically ejected from the building, either via giant industrial press or literally kicked out by a donkey. She also has robots whipped for not going fast enough, even though they can only go as fast as she designs them to go. Her idea of a motivational speech is "shoot anyone who doesn't listen hard enough".
Big Bad: She is the closest thing the series has to a main villain in terms of number of appearances, personal connections to most of the major protagonists (Fry, Bender, the Professor, Hermes and Zoidberg), and overall threat level. This is also the case in the video game, and although the movies have their respective baddies, she returns in the third as the primary antagonist.
Birthday Hater: She hates "Mother's Day" (a day when all the robots her company built show their affection), since her true love, Professor Farnsworth, left her after an argument. It's not technically her birthday, but it serves the same purpose (being a celebration centered around her).
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: She presents herself to the public as a matronly grandmother, but in reality she's an incredibly evil and abusive old woman.
Card-Carrying Jerkass: The video game at one point has her berating one of her sons by calling him a "son of a me", implying that she's open to calling herself a bitch.
Card-Carrying Villain: When she's not focused on maintaining her image of a kindly grandmother-like figure, she tends to shamelessly flaunt her wicked nature.
Walt: Mother, you are one clever old skag!
Mom: And don't you forget it!
Corrupt Corporate Executive: She's a nasty old woman and owner of a robotics company trying to take over the world, who masquerades as a sweet, kindly old lady in public.
Dating Catwoman: Professor Farnsworth has some history with Mom, which resurfaces in a few episodes.
Distaff Counterpart: Basically a female version of Mr. Burns. Which is why they hooked up in the Crisis Crossover comic book.
Early-Installment Weirdness: In her first appearance ("A Fish Full of Dollars"), while she was certainly verbally abusive to her sons, she never actually put a hand to them herself, letting Walt (the oldest), slap the other two, which he'd swiftly do as soon as Mom expressed her displeasure. In every other subsequent appearance, a scene when Mom doesn't go upside her kids' heads (including Walt) is extremely rare, if such even exists at all.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: She's normally hostile to most people she meets, but she's genuinely kind to Zoidberg.
Played With. "Overclockwise" shows her instantly reacting to anybody else (besides her) taking advantage of her "colicky bastards" (sons) with swift and deadly vengeance.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: In her first appearance, she can't get her head around the idea that Fry isn't out to put her out of business, but just wants to eat some anchovies. At first, anyway. Once she realises that actually is his goal, she leaves without a fuss.
Evil Matriarch: She provides the page image.
Evil Old Folks: She hates everyone and everything, and has actually sent every robot in the world on a revolution against humans so that they could conquer the world for her.
Fat Suit: Used to keep up with her public appeal as an innocent grandma figure... then promptly discarded elsewhere to reveal a slender hag underneath.
Faux Affably Evil: A ruthless corporate raider and abusive parent who puts on a sweet old lady routine and fat suit for her TV ads. She even advertises her typical business corruption in a humorous way - while distracting the public from investigating her outright monstrous crimes. In her first appearance in "A Fishful of Dollars", she drops the act when she finishes cutting a TV ad, and again when Fry gets in her way.
Give Geeks a Chance: Both romances she was in were nerdy scientists. More bizarrely, she seemed to regard late-middle aged Farnsworth as a stud.
Given Name Reveal: Everyone always called her "Mom", but when it was revealed that she and Zoidberg had a history, he casually addressed her as "Carol".
God Save Us from the Queen!: A modern version.
Hope Crusher: She has her Mother's Day gifts turned into fake cancer cures. "False hope! I love it!"
Hypocritical Heartwarming: As stated above, if anyone but her fucks with her kids, they're dead meat. The below quote says it all:
Mom: Nobody rips my kids off but me!
Jerkass: Good Lord! She is RUTHLESS!
Karma Houdini: She never really pays for a lot of her actions. Most punishment she got was in Bender's Game where her plan to hoard dark matter was foiled when it was rendered useless.
Lady Swears-a-Lot: Although the words she uses aren't particularly bad — she tends to favor "hell", "crap" and especially "bastard" — she curses more than even Bender when she's angry, and she tends to do it in exceedingly creative ways (such as her quote above).
Laughably Evil: Even if she is a cruel businesswoman with plans for world domination, she still provides a lot of humor thanks to her unrestrained potty mouth and habit of slapping and yelling at her sons.
Lean and Mean: She is evil and thin, but wears a selection of "fat suits" when she wants to appear as the kindly matron.
Love Makes You Evil: It's suggested that she became so bitter because Farnsworth broke off with her 70 or so years ago. Though, granted, he broke it off because she was already doing some morally reprehensible stuff, so it's more of a case that Love Makes You Worse.
Mom: Some snot-eating bastard said it made me a bitter woman.
Larry: Gee, ma, you're not-
Mom: CRAM IT, APE! (slaps him)
Mama Bear: Usually treats Walt, Larry and Igner like toejam, but if anyone else messes with them, they're in for a world of hurt. In "Overclockwise", she takes fierce exception when her sons are being cheated in online gaming:
"WHAT? Nobody rips off my kids but ME!!"
Meaningless Villain Victory: Her alternate self wins in "Bender's Game" having collected the two Macguffins, only for the whole cast to get kicked out of Bender's imaginary fantasy world and she completely loses the Dark Matter plot for real after Igner and Farnsworth destroy all dark matter in the universe.
Never Mess with Granny: In spades. Although she is by no means a Cool Old Lady, being firmly in Evil Matriarch camp.
Nice Character, Mean Actor: Public persona is a motherly figure; real persona is a self-centered bitch.
One Bad Mother: As big a jerk as Mom is, just try not to say anything bad about her when your own mother happens to be in earshot. The results wouldn't be pretty. Turns out her real name is actually Carol.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Only Zoidberg calls her Carol.
Out-of-Character Moment: As detailed below in Pet the Dog, "Leela and the Genestalk" has Mom act much nicer and less evil than her usual self.
Pet the Dog: Amazingly, even someone as callous as her has some rare moments of kindness:
Zoidberg is the only person she treats well. She was also willing to give him an expensive yeti head that Zoidberg needed for a coupon (his life savings). It could be she was also trying to help the Professor as well.
In a bit of a twisted example, she comforts Bender when he apologizes for not being able to exterminate humanity without being told to first.
She dabbled in genetic engineering to cure a person of being a giant and create plants big enough to feed world hunger. She still intended to profit off the latter, but emphasized that the resulting plants would be so cheap that even the poor could afford them. She also cured Leela's mutations in gratitude for (accidentally) helping her perfect her work.
In "Lethal Inspection", she seems genuinely sad when Hermes Conrad resigns from her company, frowning as she activates the machine to kick him out of the building.
Politically Incorrect Villain: She founded her robot building company solely to build robot slaves. Robot Lincoln managed to put a stop to that.
Rich Bitch: She's an evil, extremely rich businesswoman.
Suddenly Shouting: Usually at her kids, for setting her off.
Take Over the World: When she's feeling cranky. "CONQUER EARTH, YOU BASTARDS!"
Tsundere: The reason she's broken up and gotten back together with Professor Farnsworth several times over several decades.
Ungrateful Bitch: She receives hundreds of thousands of heartfelt cards from her robotic 'children' every Mother's Day, but she uses them as material for her products without even reading them. (After checking inside for money, of course.)
Villain with Good Publicity: She appears as a sweet, lovable old lady in public, but is really a Corrupt Corporate Executive. She may not always be planning to take over the world, but it is canon that she intends total global (or more) economic domination.
In the Hulu episode "Related To Items You've Viewed", while she still wears the fat suit in public appearances and maintains the sweet matronly act, it's revealed that her true diabolical nature is now common knowledge.
Leela: The jig is up, Mom! We're gonna expose your evil to the whole world!
Mom: What kind of threat is that? Everybody knows I'm evil.
Woman Scorned: One of the reasons for her general surliness was Professor Farnsworth dumping her, and she's never forgiven him for it, even over seventy years later, and has long dreamed of the day she could utterly destroy him.
Walt: Hell hath no fury like the vast robot armies of a woman scorned.