Abandoned Catchphrase: "But I am already in my pajamas." was intended to be his main catchphrase. He said it in "Space Pilot 3000" and "The Series Has Landed", the first two episodes of the series, before abandoning it permanently. However, in Season 8, he ends up saying that line again in "How the West Was 1010001".
Absent-Minded Professor: Extra credit goes to the episode "A Big Ball of Garbage", where he goes to an inventors' competition, realizes the invention he brought (the death clock) is the same one he showed last year, attempts to invent the same thing again after it's pointed out to him ("I need a new invention! Perhaps some kind of death clock..."), quickly creates a new invention (the smell-o-scope) to replace it, then only hours later... "Eureka!" "You built the smell-o-scope?" "No, I remembered that I'd already built it last year!"
Absurdly Elderly Father: He is at least 160 years old, but turns out to be the true father of Igner, a young adult. His mother isn't much younger than Farnsworth, either. Justified, as it's been established people can live longer in the future, which may allow people to be fertile for longer.
The Alleged Boss: Downplayed. He does actually give out assignments and the crew respects his authority enough to follow his orders. However, Farnsworth spends less time actually managing his company than he does pursuing whatever obsession he's currently fixated on.
Ambiguously Evil: At first, it's hard to pinpoint exactly what the Professor's deal is. He's an insane Mad Scientist who loves creating doomsday devices for no apparent reason, states in one episode that "there is no scientific consensus that life is important", openly admits that he always knew he would have his hand in The End of the World as We Know It, and even takes pleasure in endangering the lives of his crew, getting upset in one episode when he finds out that he won't have to kill Fry to save humanity. On the other hand, he only has this attitude while they're still alive, even seems to genuinely regret it once they're dead (not that he ever changes as a result), and he has lines that even he won't cross. He's also always on the front line to save the world whenever it's threatened by someone or something... even if they're simply worse than he is. After the show was Un-Canceled, his insanity was toned-down to make him more of a case of Good Is Not Nice.
Angrish: "If anyone needs me, I'll be in the angry dome!" He's had a separate room in the Planet Express building constructed for the express purpose of venting in the form of furious gibberish.
Anti-Hero: His morality ranges wildly, from a Villain Protagonist on par with Bender, to a simply harsh, but well-meaning defender of humanity. It says something about how questionable the Professor's moral compass is that he flirted with being Ambiguously Evil for a number of seasons.
Bad Boss: He cheerfully sends the crew on very dangerous missions; and they're not even the first crew he's done this to. He also refuses to bring the Planet Express ship up to government standards, regardless of how often his own subordinates sue him.
Bad News in a Good Way: He introduces them by saying "Good News, Everyone!". Lampshaded in "The Beast with a Billion Backs":
Farnsworth: Now, I've often said "Good News!" when sending you on a mission of extreme danger. So when I say this anomaly is "Dangerous", you can imagine how dangerous I really think it is!
Hermes: Not dangerous at all?
Farnsworth: Actually, quite dangerous indeed.
Hermes: That is quite dangerous!
Farnsworth: Indeed!
Badass Army: He was able to create a group of Atomic Supermen to take on the Harlem Globetrotters at a basketball game, who were close to winning until the timeline started glitching out due to the chronotons used to create said Supermen.
Berserk Button: Anyone using the Planet Express Ship just to get a lift.
Amy: [on a planet the crew's making a delivery to] Kif's on patrol near there. You could drop me off on the way.
Professor: We could but we won't! It's a spaceship, damn it, not a prom limousine! Oooh, if anyone needs me, I'll be in the Angry Dome!
Immediately flies into a rage whenever someone tries to provide a non-scientific explanation or solution to a problem.
WERRRNSTROOOOMMM!!!!
Beyond the Impossible: He has a habit of inventing impractical solutions for practical problems, or sometimes just plain impossible things that even the dumber characters point out should be impossible. Case in point: the Planet Express ship uses a very specific engine Farnsworth himself invented, which no one can figure out until Cubert (his cloned son) gets knocked out and has a "Eureka!" Moment of the same dream that made Farnsworth invent the engine in the first place. The best explanation the two of them offer is quite literally their imaginations allowing them to do it as scientists.
Cubert: The engines don't move the ship at all! The ship stays where it is, and the engines move the universe around it!
Bender: That's a complete load.
Cubert: Nothing's a complete load! Not if you can imagine it. That's what being a scientist is all about!
Boomerang Bigot: Towards robosexuality. He becomes a very strong advocate against it, but he eventually reveals this is due to a fling he had with a robot several years ago that ended badly.
Brilliant, but Lazy: One of the most brilliant inventors and scientists on Earth, though he's shown a lack of motivation on a number of occasions. He's even said "I really should do something... but I am already in my pajamas" more than once.
Bungling Inventor: Even someone as gifted as the Professor has had his share of bungled inventions, including a machine that made glow-in-the-dark noses while also producing an enormous amount of unusable toxic waste. Also, he nearly destroyed the fabric of space-time by creating and then artificially aging a team of genetically engineered basketball players.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: He's undeniably crazy and unstable, but the Professor is clearly established to be one of the best scientific minds in the world, and possibly the universe.
Card-Carrying Villain: At his worst, he seems to be this. He nods along when Fry calls him an "amoral crackpot", and openly admits that he always expected to cause the apocalypse someday.
He fully expects to suffer eternal damnation when he dies. In "Attack of the Killer App", when he's been standing in line for an extremely long period of time and is suddenly startled by a bright light, he screams:
Oh no! The light! I guess I'm off to Hell.
Catchphrase: Quite a few.
"Good news, everyone!" before announcing news to the crew, which is usually not good news at all.
"Wah?"
Oh my, yes / no.
"Quiet, you!"
"Oh, lordy lou!"
"But I am already in my pajamas" was nearly one but was discarded pretty soon.
As was "Holy Zombie Jesus!" and "Sweet Zombie Jesus" (both of which got edited when the show was put in reruns on Cartoon Network, most domestic and international syndicated versions, and TBS, but can be heard on Comedy Central, FOX, and on DVD and Netflix). When the show was revived on Hulu, this was changed to "Sweet Vampire Moses".
"Oh yes." (usually said after thinking, saying or doing something salacious)
"WERN-STROM!"
Characterization Marches On: More defined by his absent-mindedness in the first season, with "senile, amoral crackpot" coming later; Billy West's performance in the first season is more soft-spoken and sometimes even grandfatherly compared to the harsher voice he brings to later seasons. He softens into something closer to his initial portrayal, starting with the Comedy Central revival.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: On the topic of "coming later", he's no stranger to throwing the crew under the bus when Planet Express is in danger of being acquired, rivalled, or otherwise completely overridden, and just a little bit of leadership from him could have averted the situation. "Future Stock", "A Flight to Remember" and "The Route of All Evil" are the most prominent examples.
Farnsworth: So long, suckers!
Cloudcuckoolander: Thanks to his senility and being a mad scientist. The following is from his speech at the stockholders' meeting at the beginning of "Future Stock":
Farnsworth: Where am I?
Hermes: Move forward. Walk into the light.
Farnsworth: Oh God, I'm dead! Well, no matter. [pulls out cue cards] Thank you all for coming. I don't recognize any of you, nor can I recall why I am here. Now without further ado, a film highlighting Planet Express Inc.'s latest fiscal year.
Comedic Sociopath: His complete disregard for the safety and well-being of his crew is frequently played for humor.
Confusing Multiple Negatives: In "Roswell That Ends Well", he tells Fry that in the event that he was supposed to do anything that affects anything while in the past, "for the love of God, don't not do it!"
Cool Old Guy: He has his moments. Shooting Hitler, for example.
He even asserts his "coolness" to Leela in this exchange during "2-D Blacktop":
Leela: Professor?!? What did you do to the Planet Express ship? And why are you wearing a leather lab coat?
Farnworth: Because unlike you, I'm cool! I drive fast late at night when I should be sleeping. But you wouldn't understand.
Corrupt Corporate Executive: Despite being one of the protagonists. After all, the Planet Express slogan is "Our crew is expendable, your package isn't!" In "Bender's Game" Leela says she's spends most of her time trying to think of how to get revenge on him. The rest of the crew is totally on board with this sentiment.
*Crack!* "Oh, My Back!": Being over 160, he often has joints crack and break. Jumping can break his ankle and cracking his fingers has broken them.
Decoy Backstory: In "Proposition Infinity", Professor Farnsworth is a strong advocate against Robosexuality because, in his youth, his human girlfriend Eunice left him for a robot. Then he remembers that her name was not Eunice, but Unit, and she was actually a robot. Farnsworth realizes he too was a robosexual, so he gives up the crusade.
Depending on the Writer: In general, his level of morality tends to range from episode to episode. In some episodes, he's completely amoral and a borderline aspirant supervillain, and in other episodes, he's one of the most moral members of the crew, and the first to declare that they should do the right thing. He tends towards the latter as the series goes on.
Dirty Old Man: Though he's more insane, forgetful, mean and lazy than lecherous, as far as old man stereotypes go every now and then there are instances where he shows pervy tendencies. His first concern on being de-aged to fifty-three is to bemoan that he'll need a fake I.D. to watch "ultraporn". And he fondly remembers a time aliens invaded Earth and forced the most intelligent people to mate continuously (he's pretty upset when it appears the Omicronians aren't going to do it). He also leches over Amy a few times, such as in "Rebirth" when he takes pleasure in spanking her bottom after her rebirth even though she's already conscious. In addition the 34th issue of the tie-in comics has him go along with Fry's lie that he’s blind so he can get away with staring at a naked clone of Fry's ex-girlfriend Michelle.
Ditzy Genius: Probably the greatest scientist in the universe, but incredibly senile and deranged. He'll come down to earth when it matters, though that's very dependant on how he's being portrayed during the episode.
Eccentric Mentor: The very few times he has a good idea he is a mentor figure to the Planet Express crew who comes off as batshit.
Enraged by Idiocy: Usually it's Fry's but idiocy in general can set him off.
Everyone Calls Him "Barkeep": Usually just called "the Professor".
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: Generally a senile, immoral crackpot, but he does genuinely love his clone son Cubert, even treating him like a biological son.
Even Evil Has Standards: While it can be hard to tell due to the fact that he constantly contradicts himself, Farnsworth has proven that there are lines he won't cross.
He demands they not go after Space Bee honey, considering what happened to his last crew. And the crew before that one... Assuming he wasn't using Reverse Psychology. And given a recording is found of his last crew saying he'd told them they weren't as good as the crew before...
He killed Hitler while time traveling. Though considering he had previously been in favor of saving Hitler's brain and implanting it in a Great White Shark, it's unclear if his objection was to Hitler himself or if he had some ulterior motive. Also in the same episode, remembering the time Fry accidentally slept with his own grandmother disgusted him enough that he set his time machine to only go forward so something like that couldn't happen again.
The second episode has him momentarily look worried on handing Fry over to Zoidberg for a check-up.
He left Mom over her evil plans... granted, it seems to have been partially over their lack of practicality.
While he's a notoriously Bad Boss, he seems to be careful with how/when he actually punishes the crew. Both "The Cryonic Woman" and "Bender's Game" show him being reluctant to fire them for especially big screw-ups (though in the former example, he immediately makes Hermes do it instead), and he'll really only punish them unfairly when he's making a conscious effort to hold off on sabotaging his business later on (i.e. in "The Birdbot of Ice-Catraz", after Leela quits to join the environmental protestors, he immediately promotes Bender to captain on the basis that a good captain can't have any intuition or heart, snubbing Fry because he has too much heart and is thus even more dangerous).
Speaking of sabotage, the Robot Devil's unwillingness to compromise when forcing Fry to make a deal in "The Devil's Hands Are Idle Playthings" shocks even him:
Farnsworth: [singing] I can't believe the Robot Devil is so unforgiving!
Leela's uncontrollable outbursts of rage in "Bender's Game" is something he actively tries to hinder, to the point of attaching a shock collar to her neck.
In "Love and Rocket", he's as disturbed as everyone else when he learns about the Rasputinian Deaths the Romanticorp-manufactured Lovey Bears are forced to go through. This doesn't stop him from stunning one trying to get away, though given he had previously told the crew to act like they're In Love with Love rather than "bitter husks of human beings" in order to secure a contract from the company, he probably saw it as a greater-good.
Eyes Out of Sight: The few times his Opaque Nerd Glasses aren't obscuring his eyes, he is invariably facing away from the audience. According to Mom, they're milky white in color.
False Teeth Tomfoolery: There are occasional gags that involve him using dentures, such as "Teenage Mutant Leela's Hurdles" having him use nuclear-powered dentures that go berserk after accidentally biting Fry and acquiring a taste for human flesh, or "The Six Million Dollar Mon" having him lose his false teeth in the sink and comedically thanking Hermes after he fishes the dentures out with his new robotic arm and puts them into Farnsworth's mouth sideways.
Fantastic Racism: He's speciesist against Cygnoids, for no clear reason; and has at least one Martian's skull as a mug, dismissing their complaints about the disrespect as "whining". In "Fry and the Slurm Factory", he refers to the Grunka Lunkas as "horrible orange creatures" and requests that Glurmo inform the Grunka Lunkas that he hates them.
Foil: As Fry's closest relative, he's almost the complete opposite of him in personality; the senile, amoral mad scientist to Fry's youthful kindhearted idiocy. Occasionally their differences as family members are brought up.
Freudian Excuse: Not to his insanity, but to his hate for his parents, which stems from the fact that they tried their hardest to deprive him of science as a child by moving to a farm. This is explained towards the end of the episode because he suffered from violent night terrors and his parents did everything they could to soothe his anguish, which included trying to under-stimulate him by moving away from the city and limiting how much research he could do.
Gadgeteer Genius: He is a brilliant inventor. Usually, at any rate. While the Planet Express Ship is astoundingly fast and durable, he's also commented that it's been known to fall apart just sitting around.
Good Is Not Nice: He's helped save Earth several times over, even if in weird or nonsensical ways that sometimes don't exactly seem heroic or very savior-like. He'll also be willing to send you to die for the most petty of reasons (if not from outright boredom), was Ambiguously Evil as a genuine Mad Scientist for much of the series until evening out later on, is ready to personally commit murder if someone genuinely pisses him off, and stopped accelerating through the cyclic loop of time to assassinate Hitler.
Grumpy Old Man: Purposefully adopts the persona of an elderly grump, and then some.
"I don't have time for this! I have to go and buy a single piece of fruit with a coupon, and then return it, making everyone in line wait behind me while I complain!"
Hollywood Satanism: It's heavily implied that he's a Satanist in "Calculon 2.0", plus Satan is one of the deities he pleads for help in "The Farnsworth Parabox", and has invoked "Satan's glorious name".
Horrible Judge of Character: In one instance he honestly seemed to believe Bender was "gentle".
I'm a Humanitarian: Several episodes have suggested the Professor will, given half a chance, eat people, starting as early as the third episode, wherein he buys the corpse of a Zuban pharaoh for the purpose of eating it. "War is the H-Word" has him get pretty giddy at the thought of eating someone's heart ("to gain their courage! Their rich, tasty courage...")
Identical Grandson: Or Great-Nephew. He looked an awful lot like a nerdier version of Fry in his youth, despite being an extremely distant nephew/ grandson.
Ignored Epiphany: A Season 2 episode establishes he left Mom for realizing she was evil. "Bender's Game" has him mention they hooked up again twice thereafter, the second time ending when he again realized she was evil (the third time she dumped him).
Immediate Self-Contradiction: A Running Gag with Farnsworth has him state one thing, only to contradict it not one sentence later. It's mostly done as a side-effect of his senility than out of any actual hypocrisy.
Farnsworth: Collecting honey. Ordinary honey.
Leela: That doesn't sound so dangerous.
Farnsworth This is no ordinary honey!
Jerkass: Farnsworth is ultimately a well-intentioned and heroic man, though he's by no means a saint; he even agrees with Fry, when the latter describes him as a "senile, amoral crackpot", which just drives the point home. He often gleefully sends the crew to very dangerous missions, and "The Sting" shows he's sent multiple crews on the same mission that resulted in their deaths each and every time. The episode also implies the Professor goads said crews into going by comparing them unfavorably to his previous crew. He even condescends to his son, and sabotages his efforts when Cubert tries to start a newspaper business ("Who's going to use a company with a kicked sign? Nobody, that's who!").
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: For all of his insane cruelty, it's clear he cares about the other members of Planet Express at the end of the day, and will help save the world when it's in danger without any fuss. He also cares about his clone, Cubert, treating him as though he were his biological son.
Labcoat of Science and Medicine: Appropriately for a scientist, he always wears a white labcoat, exceptions include only the beach and skiing. He wears the labcoat even to the baseball game. He wears a black leather labcoat in "2-D Blacktop" because he's cool.
Legally Dead: It's at first assumed he did this for tax evasion, but he actually took a nap in a ditch at a park and was declared a lot of things because of that.
The Load: It's pretty heavily implied in-universe that he's one for Planet Express. In "Future Stock", the company's stock skyrockets after he's ousted, only to plummet down to less than worthless once he's reinstalled, and in "The Late Phillip J. Fry" Leela manages to turn the company into a thriving business with him gone.
Long-Lost Relative: As revealed in Near-Death Wish, Hubert has a younger brother named Floyd, who his parents raised so he would not end up like Hubert and end up in a mental institution for a good chunk of his life. He's never actually seen, but Bender recalls meeting a "homeless rodeo clown" named Floyd.
Losing Your Head: The video game has Mom decapitate his head and put it in a jar to use his brains to aid her plot against his will.
Lost Food Grievance: In "I, Roommate", he gets infuriated upon discovering that Fry ate an alien mummy he had lying around after mistaking it for jerky... because he wanted to eat it.
Made of Iron: For a man physically over one-hundred and sixty, he's amazingly durable... when the plot demands it. An exploding super-collider does no more than annoy him, for example, and the entire upper floor of Planet Express exploding doesn't do more than scratch him up a bit. However, on other occasions, his limbs can break at the slightest provocation. Or no provocation at all.
Mad Libs Catchphrase: He often would do variations on "Good news, everyone!" depending on the context. For example...
"Great news, everyone!" (This was actually the original version of the catchphrase.)
"Bad news, everyone!"
"News, everyone!"
"Good news, anyone!"
"Bad news, nobody!"
"Top secret news, everyone!"
"Good news, nobodies!"
"Impending news everyone!"
"News and weather, everyone!"
"I'm not sure if you've heard the news, because it's good, everyone!"
"News! Bad!"
Mad Scientist: So mad he was sent to a mental institution for twenty-five years when he was young.
Minor Flaw, Major Breakup: The first time he called it off with Mom, an event that broke both their hearts and still upset them decades on, it was because she wanted to make a soft toy he'd made fifteen feet tall. He didn't say a word about weaponizing the things.
Farnsworth: Things that are fifteen feet tall aren't cute!
Meaningful Name: Philo Farnsworth was responsible for inventing fully-electronic television systemsnote .
Morally Ambiguous Doctorate: Senile to the point of insanity, but mostly harmless. Has a penchant for creating doomsday devices, only keeps Amy around because she's his blood type, tries to harvest Leela's organs, is implied to be a cannibal, implanted Hitler's brain in the body of a shark, killed people for their stem cells, has been frequently cited for public nudity, and frequently, knowingly sends his crew on life-threatening adventures without warning, to the point of hiring replacements even before their demises are confirmed. In his youth, he created the modern robot, an ecological disaster.
He has several doomsday weapons simply lying about his lab, to the point of tossing the more dangerously unstable ones in the garbage:
Farnsworth: I suppose I could part with one and still be feared.
Naked Nutter: Senile and often walks around naked, shirtless, wearing only his lab coat, or other variations.
Naked People Are Funny: When it's not being hideously disturbing, at least, the Professor has a fondness for going nude at the drop of a hat.
Doctor: [as the Professor gets ready to enter searing hot tar] Sir, it's not necessary, or wise, to be naked.
Farnsworth: Pfft. You sound just like my tennis instructor.
Named After Somebody Famous: After inventor Philo Farnsworth, a pioneer of television who created the first fully electronic television system. In a later episode, the Professor claims that he's a distant relative.
Oh, My Gods!: "Buddha! Zeus! God! One of you guys do something! Help! Satan! You owe me!"
Older Than They Look: A Season 2 episode has him reveal that rather than being 150 as he claimed, he's over 160 (which was illegal). Given the progression of time in the series, by the Comedy Central revival, he's over 170 at the least. Not helping is the end of "Teenaged Mutant Leela's Hurdles", after a dip in the Fountain of Aging pushes him past his original biological age.
Omnidisciplinary Scientist: He's skilled in robotics, chemistry, engineering and genetic engineering, at the very least.
Hermes: Professor, can you wire my brain directly into the main Battle Net?
Farnsworth: I can wire anything into anything! I'm the Professor!
Only in It for the Money: When asked what field he hopes to win a Nobel Prize in, he responds "I don't care. They all pay the same". He doesn't bother to develop cleaner fuels because he's too busy developing makeup for dogs - "that's where the money is".
Opaque Nerd Glasses: A pair of Nerd Glasses, and indeed his eyes are never seen in the series (though his female form in Neutopia is wearing more fashionable, thinner cat's eye glasses). Subverted in one episode where he needed his "reading glasses" — and put on a pair several times thicker than his already fairly enormous glasses (to the point that they looked like glass cylinders). At least somewhat of a Justified Trope: Professor Farnsworth is 160 years old. Anyone's vision would become pretty bad by that age.
Pajama-Clad Hero: "Hero" may be a bit generous given how evil he can be, but he's one of the main protagonists of the show and is almost always dressed in his pajamas and slippers.
Parental Substitute: Implied to be this to Leela. The first two times she almost got married, he was the one to give her away.note 
The Pirates Who Don't Do Anything: By his own admission. He's a professor at Mars University, teaching a course on "The Mathematics of Quantum Neutrino Fields", which he just made up on the basis no student would take the course. When Fry does take the course, he's outraged.
Farnsworth: I don't know how to teach! I'm a professor!
The Professor: He's an intelligent, albeit senile and sometimes evil, scientist who often kicks off the plot of many episodes, either by sending the crew on a mission or by revealing his latest invention. He's also one in the literal sense as he's a teacher at Mars University.
Racist Grandma: He's an old man who is sometimes shown to be a bigot, particularly towards alien races. Best demonstrated by this exchange from "Fry and the Slurm Factory".
Farnsworth: Who are those horrible orange creatures over there?
Glurmo: Why, those are the Grunka Lunkas. They work here in the Slurm factory.
Farnsworth: Tell them I hate them!
Really Seven Hundred Years Old: On the surface, Farnsworth appears 80 or 90 years old but is actually in his 170's. Understandable, considering that this is the distant future.
Retired Badass: Although weak and scrawny now, it was shown in "Tip of The Zoidberg" when he was younger Hubert was pretty badass, as he almost singlehandedly killed a giant space yeti.
Robot Master: He created the robot that all modern robots are based on.
Scatterbrained Senior: He is very senile and sometimes forgets things that had happened only moments earlier.
Leela: Remember, Professor, Bender is Santa. So we don't want to hurt him, right?
Farnsworth: Yes, yes, yes, you sound like a broken mp3!
Bender: Ho, ho- [Farnsworth fires at him] Ow!
Leela: Professor! Don't you remember what I told you?
Farnsworth: NOOO!
Screw Politeness, I'm a Senior!: He even has a "crotchety grandpa discount card" (which expired, despite being good for a lifetime), and once uttered the line "I don't have time for this! I have to go buy a single piece of fruit with a coupon and then return it, making everyone wait behind me while I complain!" In fact, when he receives an award in Crimes of the Hot, for solving a problem he'd helped cause, he is absolutely nonchalant and entitled about it.
Farnsworth: Thank you. I deserve this.
Senior Sleep-Cycle: He once fell asleep while skiing and woke up at the lodge with a bronze medal around his neck.
Shameless Fanservice Guy: It is said that nudity is acceptable in the future, but the Professor seems to embrace his nakedness far more than other characters, to the audience's horror.
Signature Laugh: He does a rather high-pitched cackle.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Ogden WEEEEEEERRRRRRNSTRRROOOM!!
The Smart Guy: Albeit of the Ditzy Genius variety.
The Spock: He has absolutely no problem sending his crew on missions to almost certain death. Unlike other examples though, this is simply due to his being insane and evil.
Straw Misogynist: He has an infrequent habit of making incredibly sexist remarks, usually directed at Leela. For example, dismissing her demand to fly the ship when looking for his escaped gargoyle Pazuzu, because he wasn't "trying to find the quickest route to the mall". Ironically, he once worked for Mom, a female Corrupt Corporate Executive.
Strong Family Resemblance: To an absurd degree; Despite over 1,000 years having passed, flashbacks show (and also any time he ends getting de-aged with technology, for that matter) that he still had the distinctive Fry-family spiky orange hair before he went bald. Even discounting that though, his general face and head shape also still resembles Fry’s quite a bit.
They Called Me Mad!: By his own admission.
Farnsworth: Even I laughed at me when I invented this cross-species analyzer! But I guess I showed myself!

Leela: You're Fry's relative. Do you have any idea how he got so crazy?
Farnsworth: Huh, wha—? Oh! Yeah! They say madness runs in our family. Some even call me mad... and why? Because I dared to dream of my own race of atomic monsters. Atomic Supermen with octagonal-shaped bodies that suck blood out of [wanders away still ranting]
Token Evil Teammate: Given his near-total lack of regard for human life and the number of Doomsday devices he's created, Farnsworth is arguably on par with Bender as the crew's most evil member, especially at his worst.
Leela: Has anybody seen Fry?
Bender: [shaking his head] I didn't kill him. Professor?
Professor: [absent-mindedly] No. I've been busy.
Took a Level in Kindness: From the Comedy Central revival onward, the Professor's insanity was toned down from being Ambiguously Evil to merely Good Is Not Nice.
Truly Single Parent: He cloned himself a son from a growth on his back. Instead of having a birthday, his clone ends up celebrating his growth-scraping day.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: In a tie-in comic book, a resentful Farnsworth tampered with Wernstrom's machine that was gonna to clone an army of Zapp. This would result in the experiment going horribly wrong, altering Zapp's DNA and personality, turning him into the vain, incompentent, and dim-witted man he is today. And because Nixon couldn't risk another scandal on his watch, Zapp was able to maintain his title as Captain of the DOOP army, from where he would make many bumbling tactical decisions that would lead to death of legions of soldiers, among other things.
Vocal Evolution: Billy West's performance in the first season is much softer and quieter, before settling into a much harsher tone for the rest of the series.
What Beautiful Eyes!: According to Mom, although the audience never actually sees what they look like under his glasses. Apparently they're "milky white".