Affably Evil:
He is quite courteous with the hostages — as long as they follow his orders, of course.
He's much more friendly and likable in the flashbacks (excluding a notable Kick the Dog moment where he castrates a man with a fork) than he was during the first heist.
Age-Gap Romance: In "Lethal Negligence", while talking to Rio about the problem with his relationship with Tokyo, Berlin tells him that back when he was 18 years old, he once dated his then-44-year-old French teacher. He also discusses the trope by saying that age-gap romances happen because the older people try to get a taste of their youth again ever since they've lost it.
Big Bad: He serves as the main antagonist for Season 1 and most of Season 2, wherein he causes much of the internal conflict among the gang.
Breakout Character: He proofed to popular enough with fans to be brought back in season 3 and beyond despite dying at the end of season 2, being featured via flashbacks which are heavingly connected to the main storyline of season 3 till 5. In 2023 he also got his own spin-off series, simply called Berlin.
Character Tics: While apples are not stated to be his Trademark Favorite Food, he's commonly seen eating apples at the Mint.
Cloudcuckoolander: A sinister example. It's almost impossible to have a serious conversation with him as he constantly spouts factoids, jokes, historical tidbits or metaphors, to the point of almost being non-sequiturs at times.
Connected All Along:
He and the Professor go way back, and are hinted to be even related. In Season 3, it turns out they're actually brothers.
Season 5 reveals that he's Rafael's father.
Convenient Terminal Illness: A variant in that he willingly goes ahead with the sacrifice with the other members never thinking about it in the first place. In the final Season 2 episode, Berlin is the only member who fights against the incoming armored police squad to give time for the rest of the robbers to run to the exit from the Royal Mint of Spain they made. He ends up being shot down by the squad.
Cultured Badass: He's sophisticated, charming, often seen well-dressed, and in flashbacks he has shown an interest in art as well. He's also a tough criminal.
Deadpan Snarker: He often mocks other people with sarcasm.
Disproportionate Retribution: In a flashback, he stabs a man in the balls with a fork because he made fun of his bowtie.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: Despite being described as The Sociopath, he loves his brother Sergio, his best friend Palermo and his son Rafael.
Even Evil Has Standards: He may be a sociopathic thief who isn't above executing hostages and rapes one of them regularly, but he won't stand for being accused of white slavery and pimping.
Frame-Up: On the receiving end of it in Episode 8 of Season 2, when the Spanish National Police state he has been involved in white slavery and child abuse upon publishing his identity, in an attempt to make the Heist Team's image go down the drain. It bites them in the ass later in Episode 4 of Season 2, when Berlin uses an interview with journalists planned by them to mention the frame-up live and the journalists dig up the truth.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Gets into harsh arguments with almost everyone in the team, especially Tokyo, Denver, Rio, and Nairobi.
Genre Savvy: In the second episode of Season 1, Berlin points out to Arturo how blatantly he's wearing the "Hate Sink" sign around his neck (and what usually happens to those guys) by giving him the following "The Reason You Suck" Speech:
Berlin: You ever seen horror films? (Arturo says he does) Well, you've always seen that one guy that appears, that you can tell right away that he smells like a dead man walking? It always happens, it never fails. Arturito... you smell like a dead man walking.
Hypocrite: Berlin looks down on everyone else, but even he is not above having defects, such as raping one of the hostages.
Lack of Empathy: It's explicitly stated in his psych evaluation in Season 1. Indeed, he doesn't feel much remorse for his cruel actions.
The Last Dance: He's terminally ill with Helmer's Myopathy and sees the heist as a way to be remembered by the public.
The Lancer: He's pretty much the leader of the group within the mint and the Professor's de facto second-in-command. Regardless, they have different leadership styles.
Lima Syndrome: He grows genuinely attached to the hostage Ariadna and believes she's in love with him. Ariadna begs to differ.
Master Actor: When the journalist comes in, Berlín manages to play his role as someone who has been driven to do something desperate and angry for being framed of actions that sicken him so well that it turns public opinion in the heist team's favor.
Multiple Gunshot Death: How he dies by the GEO team raiding the Mint in the Season 2 finale.
Mysterious Past: He is Sergio's brother, and the two have been in contact but separated for much time. Three years before Season 1, he and his friend Martín developed a plan to take all the gold in the Spanish National Bank - which the Professor uses in Season 3 to both honor his brother and to save Rio.
Not So Stoic: He's calm and cool most of the time, which can occasionally be every and disturbing, but he can break if pushed too far. He nearly kills Nairobi via strangling when his civilian identity is outed and he is falsely accused of human trafficking. He also snaps when Nairobi chews him out for surrendering Tokyo to the authorities.
Not the Illness That Killed Them: He's ultimately killed not by his Helmer's Myopathy, but being gunned down by the police in order to give his cohorts time to escape the Royal Mint at the end of Season 2.
OOC Is Serious Business: After committing so many crimes all across Europe and getting away with it, he broke the mirror of a bar just with an irrational act of vandalism, and let himself be taken by the police. Why? Because he could accept that his girlfriend leaves him, that his son betrays him, but both things combined are too much, even for him.
Politically Incorrect Villain: Makes some sexist remarks towards Tokyo and Nairobi during their arguments.
Posthumous Character: After his death in the season 2 finale, he's still frequently mentioned and appears in many flashbacks. The second robbery was actually planned by him.
Pragmatic Villainy: He tells the hostages that they will not be harmed, and that the robbers will take care of them, as the hostages are (a) the only reason the police aren't assaulting the place and (b) the only means to ensure they can later escape. It does not mean he is not willing to hurt or kill (or, rather, force others to do it) so as to make his point through.
Properly Paranoid: He definitely made a good point that they should kill Gandia before he causes any trouble.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The arrogant Manly Man to the Professor's nerdy Sensitive Guy.
Serial Romeo: He was married five times, stating each time he thought he found his One True Love. He states to Rio he was quite a romantic guy in his youth truly, truly believing in the concept of love. The later seasons reveal via flashbacks he lost his faith in love when his wife left him for his own son.
Serial Spouse: He's throught five marriages and five divorces.
The Sociopath: Literally unable to empathize with other people - although, surprisingly, he also has an almost pathological need to please others.
Soft-Spoken Sadist: Is the most ruthless and evil out of the gang and is also very collected and calm, often in in creepy way.
Terminally-Ill Criminal: He has Helmer's Myopathy, which is mentioned to give him around two years of remaining life. Because of this, he's prompted to die as heroically as possible while fending off the armored police team pursuing the escaping robbers at the end of the second season, so as the make sure that the public remembers him well. Flashbacks featuring him in the following seasons delve further into how the illness motivated him to plan the Bank of Spain heist with Palermo and spend his life to his fullest.
Token Evil Teammate: He's the only robber willing to harm hostages, and even tries to kill Rio for betraying him.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Tatiana leaving him for Rafael is heavily implied to have made Berlin what he was during the first heist.
Villainous Legacy: He led the groundworks for the second heist.
Wicked Cultured: One of the most sociopathic characters, while also being a witty, eloquent Cultured Badass.
Would Hit a Girl: Or kill a girl, even if she's pregnant. Just ask Monica.
Your Days Are Numbered: He has an illness that will kill him in a couple of years.