Bash Brothers: With Rio.
Berserk Button:
He is possessive of Monica and their son, which Arturo knows and uses to get a rise out of him. Denver beats him bloody when he mentions wanting to know his son and his past relationship with Monica.
In the Season 2 premiere, the Professor telling him that he needs to get involved in another heist also gets him really mad.
Book Dumb: The most ignorant member of the team, and his father mentioned he always had troubles at school.
Bruiser with a Soft Center: Is a trigger happy thief with a temper, but he also has no issues showing his father how much he loves him, crying over his death or being concerned for Monica and their son.
Cock Fight: In Episode 12 of Season 1, Arturo deliberately starts a physical one against him in an attempt to get Mónica back. Arturo ends up failing quickly, without landing any hit on Denver before the latter overpowers him and sends him begging Denver to not punch him in the face.
Crazy Jealous Guy: Deconstructed. In the third and fourth seasons, Denver gets incredibly protective over Stockholm, acting much more erratically and even lashing out at Arturo and Rio out of paranoia that she's cheating on him with them, or otherwise threatened her safety. Unfortunately, this only serves to push Stockholm even further away from him, as his actions and behavior only terrify and alienate her even more than before.
Disowned Parent: Late in the Season 2 finale, Denver comes close to disowning Moscow as his father when the latter reveals to him that he had left his late girlfriend and Denver's mother alone at a drug market because she was always high on heroin and couldn't get back to functioning normally at all, long after previously lying to him about her being a Domestic Abuser who abandoned them herself (this lie being among his many attempts to ensure Denver's well-being). He quickly retracts when he sees Moscow receiving a fatal wound while defending Tokyo during her return to the Mint in the episode's climax.
Doting Parent: He loves Cincinnati, even if he is not biologically his and dreads the thought of leaving Cincinnati fatherless, like what happened to him upon Moscow's death.
Dumb Muscle: Not very smart, and part of the muscle.
Give the Baby a Father: Ends up becoming the father to Mónica's baby.
Good Parents: So far, despite his impulsiveness, he seems to be, and clearly loves his son. Fatherhood has made him noticeably softer: he is uneasy with leaving the baby alone, or that he might become an orphan, and he gives the hostages that are parents the chance to speak to their children, despite it not being in the plans.
Hair-Trigger Temper: A life of thuggery and drug-taking have left their mark on him. Backfires heavily in Season 3 when he almost kills the National Bank Governor when he refuses to collaborate.
Insecure Love Interest: Initially to Monica. It doesn't help that everyone else thinks that Monica fell for him only because of Stockholm Syndrome and even his father tells him that she's out of his league. This makes him believe that a smart and beautiful woman like her would never genuinely love him.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He's a bit of an asshole, but he loves his father and cares for Mónica.
Like Brother and Sister: With Tokyo. They are similar in many ways and Denver admits in season 5 that Tokyo is like a sister to him.
Lima Syndrome: Ends up falling in love with Mónica.
Odd Name Out: Downplayed. While most of the gang's nicknames are capitals (Tokyo, Berlin, Moscow, Helsinki, Oslo, Nairobi) or at least one of the most populated and renowned cities of their country (Rio), Denver isn't a particularly outstanding city in the United States.
Papa Wolf: To Mónica's son, whom he has adopted. When Arturo, Cincinnati's biological father and a prick, goads Denver into thinking he will meet his son after the heist, Denver loses it and beats him bloody.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The brash Manly Man to Rio's naive and innocent Sensitive Guy.
Signature Laugh: His distinguishable laughter has a punctuated sound on the "h" part, and he laughs quite a lot.
Smoking Hot Sex: In Episode 11 of Season 1, he smokes after having sex with Mónica for the first time.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: He absolutely adores his father Moscow and considers himself a disappointment as he doesn't have any standout skills compared to him. Moscow, of course, begs to differ.
Would Harm a Senior: He decks (and almost accidentally kills) Mario because he refused to cooperate with the gang in the Bank heist.