Bald Head of Toughness: Bald and the strong Big Guy of the group.
Balkan Bastard: Subverted. When introducing the team, Tokyo specifically points to Helsinki being Serbian as proof he'd be great muscle. Despite being a former soldier who's seen some shit, however, Helsinki is very affable and caring to those close to him.
Big Fun: When not part of the heist, Helsinki is a laughable, joyful man who loves his friends dearly.
Bruiser with a Soft Center: He's a sensitive and caring man under all of the muscle and silence.
Divergent Character Evolution: He and Oslo start off as Those Two Guys. After Oslo's death, Helsinki slowly starts to reveal his Hidden Depths, especially after he befriends Nairobi.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: In Episode 7 of Season 1, when the Professor asks him if he had gotten their stakeout car destroyed and brought the 1000 euros the Professor gave him so the scrapyard worker would not ask any questions, Helsinki answers that he sent the money to his family and just left the car at the scrapyard, not taking into consideration that there was a good reason the car had to be destroyed.
Gay Best Friend: Becomes this to Nairobi in season 3 and 4.
Gentle Giant: The biggest member of the group, and a softy towards the all the people he cares about.
Manly Gay: He's a gruff, strong and muscular soldier, and later revealed to be gay.
Mercy Kill: Does this to Oslo via Vorpal Pillow in the Season 2 premiere, after seeing the latter won't be able to recover from his head trauma.
Nice Guy: Introduced as The Brute, but is eventually revealed to be one of the kindest characters.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: The Professor gave Helsinki 1000 euros to get a scrapyard's worker to destroy a car that had some of the team's fingerprints on it, no questions asked. Not only did Helsinki not get the car destroyed — he sent the cash to his family — he didn't even think of cleaning the fingerprints. By the time the Professor asks him about it in Episode 7 of Season 1, the former is forced to risk being identified and his life to find the car and clean it himself before the cops find it.
Platonic Life-Partners: After the Time Skip between Seasons 2 and 3, he becomes this with Nairobi, although she also develops romantic feelings for him. Although he doesn't return them, he still care about her deeply, to the point of being the most affected by Nairobi's death by Ghandia's hands.
Straight Gay: He has no stereotypical gay traits, to the point where Nairobi has to be explicitly told by both Tokyo and Helsinki himself that he's queer.
Tattooed Crook: He's the toughest-looking member of the heist team, and has tattoos in his arms to go with it.
Vorpal Pillow: How he Mercy Kills Oslo in the first episode of Season 2.
You No Take Candle: Downplayed. While he appears to have a good understanding of Spanish and is capable of making full cohesive sentences at times, most of the time his lines are rather short, omitting grammar components aside from the key words. This represents his Serbian nationality and the fact that his primary language is Russian.