But I Can't Be Pregnant!: Inverted. She tells Arturo that she's pregnant and he's the father but Arturo badgers her that there's no way it can be his because of his low fertility.
Character Development: She start as a dominated woman with little control in her life to a rebellious one who fights for what she believes in.
Defecting for Love: She ends up switching sides and joining the thieves because of her love for Denver.
Good Girls Avoid Abortion: When Arturo tells Mónica he does not plan to divorce his wife, she requests an abortive pill. Denver convinces her not to take it, at least for a while.
Horrible Judge of Character: She genuinely liked Arturo in the beginning. She gets better, but you have to wonder what she has ever seen in him in the first place.
Mama Bear: Is enraged when Julia reveals herself as one of them to the hostages, therefore no longer the viable option to raise Cincinnati if something happens to both her and Denver.
A Match Made in Stockholm: Discussed in-universe when she falls in love with Denver. Her city nickname even becomes Stockholm to reference the Stockholm Syndrome when she officially joins the crew.
Morality Pet: To Denver, when he starts to show his caring side around her in season 1.
Nice Girl: Lampshaded by Rio who becomes close to her, since she was the only one able to comfort him after his traumatic tortures.
Pay Evil unto Evil: Is the one to remove Arturo from the heist for good by shooting him.
Pregnant Hostage: During the Mint heist.
Sexy Secretary: She has been in a relationship with Arturo for several years by the time the series begins.
Sleeping with the Boss: At the beginning of the series, Arturo has had an affair relationship with her for several years, with Tokyo narrating that Mónica had made him feel young again ever since his marriage to his wife Laura 14 years ago. During the Mint heist, she finds Denver to be a better boyfriend for her and leaves Arturo while defecting to the heist team at the end.
Uptown Girl: Lampshaded. Moscow tells Denver she is out of his league in almost every way and compares her to his past girlfriends, citing she is more educated, kind and beautiful than any of them.
Women Are Wiser: Keeps her cool after Nairobi dies and takes over parts of the operation.