Action Girl: Her main role within the team. Though she is at times The Millstone, she's most effective when it comes to shootouts and confrontations. She's one of the robbers to hold down the GEO team in Season 2, and manages to incapacitate Gandia by thrusting a grenade shrapnel in his back in Season 5.
Age-Gap Romance: She has had two of these.
Her first boyfriend was about 14 years older than her.
There are plenty of comments on the 15-year age gap between her and Rio.
Ambiguously Bi: She makes out with Allison in Season 1, but it's not clear whether that's because she's attracted to her or whether it's just a move to show her power over the hostages.
Awesomeness by Analysis: She correctly deduces that Lisbon is still alive due to a lack of publication regarding her supposed "death", how they imprisoned and tortured Rio without legal authority, and because she constantly witnessed how sound is constantly used to fool people into believing something else is happening.
Boyish Short Hair: Keeps her hair short starting Season 3 and is an Action Girl.
Character Development: Becomes much less reckless as season 3 and 4 go on and even takes over leading the team quite effectively, deposing Palermo.
Character Narrator: She doubles as a narrator for much of the series' episodes, narrating specific moments from time to time.
Clingy Jealous Girl: Tokyo gets rather angry when she notices Rio is getting closer to Allison Parker.
Dead All Along: It's revealed that she is narrating the series posthumously from the afterlife.
Death by Flashback: A lot of her backstory is given before her last stand.
Decoy Protagonist: At first she was made out to be the lead character as she was the one who narrated the series from her point of view. But after her death, it is clear that Sergio/The Professor is the true lead character.
Defiant Captive: When she's captured by the very dangerous Gandia, she's not scared of him at all. While her hands are tied, it doesn't stop her from insulting him and trying to kick him.
Defiant to the End: Takes down Gandia and other Spec Ops soldiers with her grenades rather than allowing them to kill her.
Disappeared Dad: As she explains to Rio in a flashback from Episode 5 of Season 1, she grew up without a father, with her mother only taking care of her. Because her mother had no babysitter or caretaker to trust, she often left a young Tokyo (8 to 9 years old, as Tokyo herself cites) alone at home whenever she went to her factory job.
Disowned Parent: In the flashback to the first season's fifth episode wherein the Professor assigns Rio and Tokyo to conduct an initial survey of the Royal Mint of Spain, Tokyo asks the Professor if it's because he thinks she's not good enough as a member of the heist team before following up with her mother, to which the Professor tells her that she died of a heart attack the previous day, and was worried about informing her because she wouldn't have been able to farewell her by that point. Tokyo tells him that she had effectively disowned her mother after her last call with her back at the beginning of the first episode, claiming that she was essentially trying to bring her to the police. She regrets her claim not long after, though, as she talks to Rio about her in a subsequent flashback.
Dude Magnet: She's considered irresistible by men, especially Rio, Denver, and even Gandia. Even Berlin states he finds her attractive in one of the first episodes, even if he usually doesn't get along with her.
Fearless Fool: By far the bravest of the robbers, which is best seen by her being the only one to not fear Gandia. However, this very bravery leads to her making incredibly reckless decisions that endanger the plan.
Foreshadowing: There are a few clues that Tokyo was Dead All Along:
She narrates events that she wasn't there to observe. While it could be chalked as usual narrator shtick, it also matches well with her being dead.
The events of the Bank of Heist were also done in past tense.
He Is Not My Boyfriend: Tokyo denies she is in a relationship with Rio, saying he is a kid - even though they have been having sex for several months already. This leads Rio to tell Tokyo that he should be with a girl of his own age, instead of her. However, they later make up and confirm their love for each other.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Nairobi.
Hidden Depths: Though considered by some as The Millstone, she actually learns from the Professor's lessons when push comes to shove. She follows his tip to stall for time when she gets captured, which eventually leads to her returning to the bank, and manages to rightly assume that Raquel is still alive because, as the Professor taught her, sound can be a tool of deception. The best part is the Professor heeds Tokyo's suggestion and creates a plan out of this, with the result of successfully sneaking Raquel into the bank.
Hot-Blooded: Her impulsive actions endanger the plan multiple times, and cause a lot of problems within the team.
Idiot Ball: The worst offender of the team, as she often tends to act before thinking. It often happens for the sake of the plot, such as Rio being captured in season 3 because of Tokyo's actions.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She's often short-tempered, selfish, and unreasonable, but it's shown many times that she cares about the other members of the team. Despite her thoughtless actions, she's not malicious.
Like Brother and Sister: With Denver. They are similar in many ways and Denver admits in Season 5 that Tokyo is like a sister to him. Besides the Professor (father figure), Rio (Love Interest), and Nairobi (best friend), Denver is the closest to her.
Lovely Angels: With Nairobi in Season 3 first episodes combined with Back-to-Back Badass.
The Millstone: Her impulsivity has made things worse for the team many times.
Ms. Fanservice: She's certainly beautiful in face and body, which is acknowledged a fair amount of times, and has a few almost naked scenes.
The Narrator: Her voice over starts and ends every episode. After the Part 5 mid-season finale, she is revealed to be a posthumous narrator.
Sacrificial Lion: Literally when she blows herself up and takes down Gandia with her.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: She's the tough Strong Girl, while her love interest Rio is considered the weakest member of the team but is a Teen Genius hacker.
Taking You with Me: When cornered in the kitchen of the Bank of Spain, she is too injured to climb down the dumbwaiter, so she chooses to stay behind to cover for Manila and Denver. When the military squad gets to her, she manages to cook all the grenades she carries, and the ensuing explosion takes out 5 squad members, including Gandia.
The Tease: She's a Ms. Fanservice who likes to flirt with men and sometimes even women.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: While she doesn't hurt people intentionally, she tends to cause serious troubles to people close to her, like Moscow's death, or Rio being captured, which was the catalyst for the second storyline. The second heist later leads to Nairobi's death, Helsinki being critically injured, and her own death. The only positive thing to come out of it is Sierra allying with the heist team and Gandia getting a Karmic Death after his bloody rampage.
Violently Protective Girlfriend: Tokyo goes berserk after Helsinki beats the crap out of Rio, telling the Professor that, if it happens again, she will kill him (or Berlin, or Helsinki).