The Ace: He's painted at being good at nearly everything. Succeeds at everything he attempts and is painted as the current star of the team. He's good at everything he does and people make sure to tell him so. Subverted by Season 4 and completely gone by Season 5.
All Gays Love Theater: Blaine is gay, enjoys acting and attends theatre school after graduation.
Aloof Big Brother: We meet his, Cooper, in "Big Brother".
Always Someone Better: To Kurt and some other New Directions' members. Subverted, as he's not necessarily always better, but always ends up being the one who gets the recognition. When the power balance changes in late season 5, he is panicked.
Attention Whore: To the point where it's reflected by his wardrobe.
Kurt: For your audition, let's try to avoid shocking patterns and anything that says "Look at me, I'm the center of attention and this primary color proves it!"
Awkward Father-Son Bonding Activity: Tells us in "Sexy" that rebuilding an old car with his dad was this, and seems to imply that his father is something of a Heteronormative Crusader.
Big Brother Mentor: To Kurt in the beginning, though eventually it came out that he was just as clueless about love as Kurt was. Though many fans hoped for him to become a Sexy Mentor - and were made very happy in "Original Song". Ironically, Blaine is a year younger than Kurt, though some theorize he was held back after having a rough year.
The Big Damn Kiss: With Kurt.
Big Man on Campus: Played to the trope. He's "the New Rachel," senior class president and in 23 different clubs.
Big Ol' Eyebrows: And let's just say that the fandom noticed
Breakout Character: And his reveal that he's actually a year younger than Kurt pretty much guaranteed that he would be one of the main stars of the 4th season following most of the main cast leaving Lima.
Drama Queen: An example that makes Rachel and Kurt look tame in comparison. If Blaine cannot react to anything without making an absolute spectacle of it.
Expy: Of Blane McDonnagh from Pretty in Pink.
Eye Scream: During a show-down with the Warblers under Sebastian's leadership, Sebastian throws slushie filled with rock salt in Blaine's face and it cuts his eye, causing him to be out of action for a couple episodes.
Iconic Item: Bow ties on his neck and truck-load of gel on his head. Without the latter, he gets mistaken for a terrorist. Without both, Sam doesn't recognize him and is a little freak out why this strange man insists on talking to him.
Iconic Sequel Character: Introduced in Season 2, as a Love Interest for Kurt before joining the Glee Club himself in Season 3. He and Sam were the only new characters to have significant storylines after their introductory season, and both are given a sort of "Honorary Original" status.
Incompatible Orientation: Let's face it, his and Rachel's relationship was doomed from the beginning. And now Tina has a crush on him while he has a crush on Sam, his Heterosexual Life-Partner. This didn't make the Sadie Hawkins Dance awkward at all. Unlike many people in this trope he was aware of the futility of his crush and was aware it was mostly him displacing his affections for Kurt on to Sam.
In-Series Nickname: Rachel, Kurt and several other characters have called him "Blaine Warbler." Brittany thinks it's his real full name. This actually gets deconstructed in season 4 by Hunter, the new captain of the Warblers in his efforts to manipulate Blaine into rejoining the flock. He points out that people at McKinley still call him Blaine Warbler despite being at his new school for over a year now - in essence, isolating him from the rest of the New Directions, who all pretty much act like a dysfunctional family. That on top of the fact that his new school reminds him constantly of his ex-boyfriend nearly leads to him being convinced that he really doesn't belong at WMHS and transferring back to Dalton.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: Pulls a variation of it in "I Am Unicorn" when we find out that, despite having originally planned on trying out for Tony in the school musical, he ends up trying out for Bernardo or Officer Krupke because he knows how much Kurt wants the part. Leading to a really angsty cliffhanger when Artie asks him if he wants to read for Tony...
Kick the Dog:
Not intentionally, but in part of Season 2 Blaine's somewhat oblivious nature often caused Kurt some squirming about their relationship status. In "Silly Love Songs", Blaine came clean that he considered Kurt a friend until.
Downplayed as after his epiphany in Original Song, he acknowledges his feeling's for Kurt and since then he's always demonstrated to pay close attention to Kurt's feelings and to care a lot about him and his well being.
When he cheats on Kurt. They don't even show the guy he has sex with, which doesn't exactly paint Blaine in a positive light.
Limited Wardrobe: During season 2, where he was rarely seen wearing something other than his Dalton uniform.
Love Epiphany: In "Original Song" as Kurt sings "Blackbird".
Magical Queer:
An unusual case, since the person he's guiding is also gay, which makes him more like Kurt's Sexy Mentor. It was Kurt's taking his advice that caused Karofsky's bullying to worsen to the point that Kurt was forced to transfer to Dalton.
Attempts to be one for Karofsky, although it doesn't quite work. Though to be fair, it's also probably safer than the alternative if you know about said Armored Closet Gay's violent tendencies...
Mr. Fanservice: Once you get him out of his Dalton uniform, he's prone to very tight trousers in bright colors. So much so that his cover of "Teenage Dream" became the fastest-selling song in Glee history, with the highest-recorded first week sales of any song from the show
New Transfer Student: As of Season 3, due to Darren Criss being made a series regular. Almost refreshingly, he remembered to show up in street clothes for his first day at McKinley.
Oblivious to Love: He had no idea his close friendship with Kurt could have been interpreted as something more for the longest time. He does it again in season 3, by being unaware that he has a Stalker with a Crush in the form of Sebastian. And again in season 4, when he is completely oblivious to Tina's massive crush on him (though this time he is excused by the fact that he assumed he's made it clear to the ladies about Incompatible Orientation).
One Head Taller: Zig-Zagged. Though scenes are often shot in a way so that the camera portrays Blaine as the "bigger" man in order to play up his mentor aspects, in standing group shots it's clear that Kurt is taller than him by several inches, and 'Baby, It's Cold Outside' in particular is shot with an emphasis on the two characters' equality. However, in later episodes they resume with this trope, especially for the kiss and on the Warbler album is edited so that Kurt is noticeably shorter than Blaine. It appears that they use this trope whenever possible, and don't bother when they can't. Making for two hilarious scenes in "Night of Neglect" and "Prom Queen"—the former is when Blaine tries to shove Karofsky, who is a head taller and far more muscular, and "Prom Queen" is when he dances with Kurt.
Only Sane Man: Shows signs of this, especially in season three. Completely obliterated by Season 5 (See: "Puppet Master.")
Pastimes Prove Personality:
Blaine hasn't really gotten much character development since joining the cast full-time, but CSI Tumblr is pretty good at figuring out his hobbies based on the decor in his room. Apparently, he fences, boxes, plays Polo, collects model cars and adorable little robots, has a substantial amount of old cameras as well as a wall of photographs, and reads books meant for teenage girls. Only time will tell if this is just the set designers having fun, or signs of Blaine's Hidden Depths.
Season 4 went out of the way to give Blaine more depth and interests outside of Kurt. He is into comic books, is in 23 different clubs and expresses interests in social justice and politics. Season 5 showed that he is truly weird and has a thing for puppets. He also enjoys reading Star Wars fanfiction with Sam.
In his early appearances Blaine mentions being a huge college football fan (which becomes a minor plot point in "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle"), though it's really not mentioned after Season Two.
Quirky Curls: When his hair is un-gelled. Apparently, they're terrifying.
Relationship Upgrade: With Kurt as of "Original Song." The fandom was ecstatic.
Satellite Love Interest: The greater majority of Blaine's story and characterizations revolved around being Kurt's crush and later boyfriend, even well into season 3 when he got promoted to the main cast. This gets deconstructed in season 4, particularly after his and Kurt's breakup. He pretty much says in "Dynamic Duets" he feels like he's floating and doesn't know who he is since the breakup - doesn't really know who he is without Kurt. (This seemed to indicate someone who had emotional issues underlying the current situation, but the writers never actually went there.)
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Manly Man to Kurt's Sensitive Guy. Hilariously inverted by Season 5.
Serenade Your Lover: He has a habit of doing this.
His first attempt doubles as Epic Fail. In "Silly Love Songs," when he brought the Warblers with him to serenade a guy he liked while he was working. What went wrong? 1. Poor Jeremiah got fired since it seemed like the disturbance was his fault, 2. he wasn't fully out of the closet yet, and 3. the reason he never pursued a relationship with Blaine in the first place is because Blaine is underage.
After the Relationship Upgrade with Kurt and Kurt's triumphant return to McKinley, he brings the Warblers for a much more successful serenade of "Somewhere Only We Know" in the school courtyard.
His surprise serenade, complete with back up band, to "It's Time" by Imagine Dragons.
Surprise serenaded Kurt again in "Love, Love, Love" before proposing to him.
Whilst not a lover, he serenaded Sam to express, without truly expressing, his feelings for him (to which Sam told him he loved him but only like a brother).
Socially Awkward Hero: If you can consider being a singer this shows version of "heroic". He's a great performer and has sung onstage loads of times, but has had difficulty confronting bullies and can never tell when somebody is flirting with him.
Spotlight-Stealing Squad: His Ascended Extra status from a Warbler to the male lead doesn't help, especially when you consider that he gets far more screentime than even the original characters. Then you consider that the episode after Karofsky's attempted suicide and Quinn's near death doesn't even mention that and instead focuses on Blaine's relationship with his brother. Who has never been seen, or even mentioned before this episode. Or after, for that matter.
Taking the Bullet: Well, the rock salt filled slushie, really, but the reasoning remains the same.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: well, dark and handsome. Tall, not so much.
Tiny Schoolboy: Blaine isn't exactly tiny, but of the boys, only Artie is shorter than him.
Took a Level in Badass: Apparently, after he transferred to Dalton due to being bullied so much he took up boxing and started a Dalton branch of Fight Club, which he obviously can't talk about.
Vague Age: Originally assumed by most fans to be a year older than Kurt, he was later revealed to be a grade behind him. He doesn't seem like the type to fail a grade. Confirmed as 18 in Season 5.
"Well Done, Son" Guy:
Shows hints of this, though nothing explicit so far. All we know is that his Dad "built a car with him because he thought it might make him straight."
He fears being inadequate to (as in "not living up to the expectations of") his beloved ones, shown repeatedly with Kurt and discussed with his brother Cooper.