All for Nothing: After learning that Sue would be one of the judges at Regionals, Puck says this word for word.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: The majority of Puck's appeal is his delinquency and he knows it. The show loves to subvert it though, by showing both why dating a 'bad boy' isn't all that it's cracked up to be, and also that being the 'bad boy' isn't all that good for Puck himself.
Ambiguously Brown: Subverted. Lauren is initially attracted to him when she thinks he's this, but was disappointed to learn that he's just a plain old white guy with a tan.
Bad "Bad Acting": He demonstrates both types of bad acting during Season One. During the mattress commercial, he delivers his lines in a very stilted way, while he goes completely over the top in "Run Joey Run"
Bash Brothers: He and Finn often have this dynamic, and it comes out especially in "Funk" when they immediately know that the job of vandalizing Vocal Adrenaline's cars will fall to them. This lessens over time as Finn pulls away from Puck due to the fact that Finn's girlfriends cheating on him with Puck was becoming a pattern.
The Beard: One fan theory was that Santana's extreme jealousy whenever Puck is with anyone else is because she believes that her relationship with him is what keeps people from figuring out she likes girls.
Beta Couple: Him and Quinn in the longer run. They're nowhere near stable, but their relationship somehow mirrors Finn and Rachel's, with the soul mates leitmotif, going on and off, but proving to be 'the one' at the story's turning points. Also both of the pairings are sort of by-products of each other.
Betty and Veronica: He is the Veronica twice-over to Finn in their triangles with Quinn and Rachel.
Big Brother Instinct: Towards his half-brother, Jake. He flies across the country to give him advice and is generally very supportive/
Book Dumb: While hardly stupid, he clearly doesn't know very much about any academic subjects. The show really took this to town during Quinn's pregnancy, with Puck frequently displaying his ignorance of basic reproductive health.
The Bully: Of the Jerk Jock variety. His first appearance is literally him slushy-ing Rachel.
Can't Act Perverted Toward a Love Interest: For all his womanizing attitude, Puck is actually mostly respectful to both Quinn and Rachel when they were dating. Only if you forget the "sexting" and the "We were never friends" bits. When he and Lauren were dating, he was quite the gentleman...sometimes.
The Casanova: He's portrayed as a womanizer since day one, and when he opens a pool business he finds himself sleeping with various single moms he works for.
Chick Magnet: There's Quinn (mother of his baby), Rachel (with who he hooked up twice, the second time while she's with Finn), Santana (dated and had sex multiple times before she comes out), Brittany (both admitted having sex with each other before the series begin), Mercedes (they date during an episode of Season 1, and there's also quite a bit of Ship Tease later on), Lauren (his girlfriend in Season 2), Kitty (who he dates during most of Season 4) and Shelby (his baby's adoptive mom, with whom he has sex with in Season 3).
Closet Geek: Mild version. He's still a jock and a self-style "badass" but has some nerdy tendencies, such as some very atypical musical tastes for your standard football-playing bully. He's also something of a Momma's Boy, and has a deep love for Super Mario Bros.. Also he plays the accordion.
Commuting on a Bus: In season 4, he's no longer a regular but pops in and out of the story.
Delinquent Hair: He wears a mohawk for the first three seasons, to demonstrate his bad-boy persona, and "Laryngitis" makes it explicit that said bad-boy persona is entirely tied up with his hair. Notably, when he joins the Air Force and sorts himself out, he gets a sensible haircut.
Disappeared Dad: His dad walked out of his family's life and it has a profound effect on how Puck views the topic of fatherhood.
Disproportionate Retribution: Vocal Adrenaline covers New Directions' choir room in toilet paper. Puck's Response? Slice the tires of their cars.
Easily Forgiven: His first appearance was him slushy-ing Rachel. A few episodes later she's dating him. Averted in that Finn flat out does not forgive him.
Eating the Eye Candy: This appears to be Puck's modus operandi to seduce the older women in Lima and he causes this constantly to them, going as far as to spice it up with a nipple ring.
Everyone Has Standards: He thinks it would be cruel to tell Brittany that Santa isn't real.
Expository Hairstyle Change: In Season 5 when he comes back, he has a full head of it.
Also Season 1's "Laryngitis" episode, when he gets a Traumatic Haircut , shaving off his Mohawk and losing his status because of it.
Fascinating Eyebrow: Puck at least indulges this once, as seen in “Ballads” during his inner monologue.
Freudian Excuse: The fact that neither of Puck's parents are interested in his life seems to inform both why he acts out so much, and also why he craves the attention of older women so much.
Heel–Face Turn: In the first season, he's a bully and remains a jackass even after joining the Glee club (impregnating his best friend's girlfriend and all). However, his maturity grows over the course of the second season and he becomes one of the most dedicated members of the New Directions. In the third season, he is even attempting to be in his daughter's life.
Heroic BSoD: Happens to him in "Special Education" after the football team locks him in a portable lavatory.
Hot for Teacher: He covers this song in "Mash-Off," inspired by his feelings for Shelby Corcoran.
Hypocritical Heartwarming: Puck mocks Kurt endlessly - but when Karofsky drives Kurt to Dalton, Puck's reaction is approximately, "You made my boy Kurt leave. You are therefore on the top of my hit list."
I'm a Man; I Can't Help It: Puck's personal mantra; this is not amusing to Quinn in the least. This is even his defense when he's accused of posting the Glist in "Bad Reputation": If he were going to create a list ranking students by their sexual promiscuity, he would place himself at the top, not in the bottom five, like Quinn did.
Important Haircut: Has one in the back nine that leads to him dropping most of his Jerkass behavior.
By the end of Season 4, he grew a full head, symbolizing his maturity.
Informed Judaism: Subverted. Puck is very proud of his Jewish heritage, and owns it loudly.
I Take Offense to That Last One: In "Bad Reputation", he freely admits to 'owning' the activities of beating up people and such... but takes offense at even being asked if he's lied.
Jerk Jock: Due to his popularity, he's boastful amongst his fellow Glee club mates and likes to belittle them for having more success than them.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Underneath it all, Puck seems genuinely upset about Quinn keeping him away from their baby in favor of Finn as the father. Taken even further in Season 3: Puck mentions in voice over that he's willing to put his obnoxious attitude and womanizing behavior to bed permanently in order to be with Shelby and to be a good father for Beth.
Season 4 seemed to flip flop with this; Puck seemed to have moments of regressions, but overall his maturity worn out... except for one episode that implied he slept with Kitty.
Season 5 completed his character development; he joined the Air Force, becoming Airman First Class, and he and Quinn finally got together for good.
Karma Houdini: Downplayed, while he rarely faces consequences for his antagonism towards fellow Glee members and general bullying, his relationships with Finn and Quinn has suffered due to his actions.
Ladykiller in Love: When he falls for Lauren Zizes after she batters Santana.
Also Quinn in season 1 but that got dropped out of nowhere by season 2.
Launcher of a Thousand Ships: In-universe no less. He was linked to every female in the club except for Tina.
Likes Older Women: He didn't get a job as a pool boy just for the money.
Puck: I had sex with your mom. No, seriously: I cleaned your pool, and then I had sex with her... on your bed. Nice Star Wars sheets.
Limited Wardrobe: After he joins the Air Force post-"The Quarterback," Puck is seen wearing his uniform in almost every appearance for the rest of the series. The only exception to this is when he is performing 'Take on Me' with the rest of the New Directions alumni in "Homecoming."
Misfit Mobilization Moment: Although the confrontation never actually goes down, after New Directions learns about Jesse and Vocal Adrenaline egging Rachel, a furious Puck calls out to Matt and Mike to help him get revenge. He's soon joined by all the boys, even Kurt and Artie.
Mr. Fanservice: An in-series one no less.
Noble Demon:
Especially in season 2, where his more noble aspects are shown.
He did show some signs earlier on, for example when he lost his social status after shaving off his mohawk in the first season. At one point a group of wimpy kids lead by Jacob Ben Israel came to cement the change by throwing Puck into the trash. Instead of, say, beating them up, Puck resolved that it was only right, let them throw him into the dumpster with a hilariously serene expression and started to work back onto the social ladder the 'fair' way, by dating a cheerleader. Twisted as it was, at least he wasn't some mindless bully, but really respected the social order.
Odd Friendship: With Artie, even though it starts due to Puck using Artie to fulfill his community service requirement. It gets noted in "Rumours" and "Prom Queen" where at the start of Artie's solo number note , it's Puck that appears as the backup.
Also, his Pet the Dog moment with Becky in "Prom-A-Saurus."
His strongest Odd Friendship is with Coach Beiste.
Only Known by Their Nickname
Parental Neglect : Puck's mom, a single working mother, did not attend a single concert or football game in four years. This and his Disappeared Dad drive his desire to be part of Beth's life.
Pizza Boy Special Delivery: Puck uses his pool cleaning job as an opportunity to service bored housewives.
Popular Is Dumb: While Puck is notably more savvy and articulate than Finn and Brittany, he lacks quite a lot in the common sense department and is quite Book Dumb.
Put on a Bus: Puck spent time in juvenile detention for stealing an ATM and was absent from two episodes. However, this was only a temporary case unlike Matt; Mark Salling wanted some time off to promote his original music. He would leave the show for good at the end of season 3, but would make at least one appearance in the following three seasons.
Really Gets Around: Puck is this par excellence, as he's had countless sexual and romantic partners including Santana, Rachel, Mercedes, Quinn and countless housewives among Lima.
Rousing Speech: Puck somehow manages to combine these in "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle".
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Puck's the Manly Man to Finn's Sensitive Guy.
Shipper on Deck: As of "New York," he and the rest of New Directions' guys (Kurt included!) seem to be actively shipping Finn and Rachel.
Token Minority Couple: Invoked. Puck uses his and Rachel's shared Judaism to get in her pants more than once after his mother told him to go date a nice Jewish girl.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Puck's relationship and friendship with the members of Glee borders of this.
You Need to Get Laid: He himself notes that after he started sexing up older women, he didn't feel the need to beat up people nearly as much.