Abusive Parents: While not a parent personally, Carter is basically her and Rips' stepchild through circumstances. However, Beth is far from a good parent and regularly abuses or neglects the poor kid to the point even when Carter tries to bond with her, she just dismisses him even when he tries to call her "mom", she just coldly tells him his mother is dead and she's not her. This cruel act leaves the poor kid in tears as she walks away.
Ax-Crazy: Beth is a psychotic individual who takes sadistic joy in tormenting people around her, especially Jamie. Beth eventually becomes a murderer by personally killing Jamie, making his death as slow as possible.
The Bad Guy Wins: By and far, she's the most amoral character in the series, and by the end of it all she kills Jamie and makes it look like he went on the run, ruins his reputation in spite of everything he's done for the family, has his body dumped to the train station, and gets to move to Texas with Rip to start her life over. While she and Kayce are forced to sell the ranch to pay off their debts due to their father's actions, she gets away with all the countless crimes she's done and gets away with murdering Jamie with sadistic glee. Of course, what with how the series ends for the Dutton family, the "winning" part of this trope is essentially loosely defined as "didn't die"; her victory is pyrrhic at best, and she now has to live with the fact that her unhinged actions destroyed the Duttons' reputation, effectively permanently.
Beauty Is Never Tarnished: Generally averted, hard.
Late in Season 2, when the hitmen from the Becks arrive at her office and leave Beth severely beaten, it takes the entire rest of the second season and a few episodes of season 3 for the bruises and marks to fade away. Even by the midpoint of season 3, she still looks as if she has some damage to her face, including what looks like a scar beneath the corner of her right eye.
Due to an explosion that nearly kills her at the end of Season 3, she sports massive bruises, a black-eye, stitches across her face and (as revealed during a love scene later in the season) significant burn damage to her entire back. By the time the season ends, she still hasn't completely healed.
Big "NO!": Once she realizes that her father, John, has seemingly taken his own life midway through season 5, she lapses into this.
Broken Bird: Her mother's death and the hysterectomy performed on her turns her into a cynical, callous and sadistic individual, barely able to hold herself together, and forms the core of her character. Beth is a mess. And John is largely responsible for this. Blaming a teenager for her mother's accidental death? Yeah, no wonder she turned into daddy's damaged little pumpkin!
Cain and Abel: The Cain to Jamie's Abel. Beth is extremely cruel and abusive to Jamie, going to such lengths as to force him to kill his own father at the end of Season 4 and then use it as blackmail. When she finds out Jamie has a son, she threatens to take him away from Jamie. When Jamie makes his move against John and reveals to Beth the "train station", effectively rendering her blackmail powerless over him, Beth has a Villainous Breakdown and asks her father to outright murder Jamie.
Daddy's Girl: A dark example. It's clear John loves Beth far more he ever would Jamie, to which he fully sides with her over anything with Jamie and lets her abuse Jamie without remorse.
Damsel in Distress: Held hostage and nearly killed by Malcolm Beck's men in Season 2, before Rip arrives to save her.
Deadpan Snarker: Beth has a rather dry and venomous wit whenever she talks to people.
Double Standard: Exemplified as part of her character flaw — she repeatedly blames others for past incidents while refusing to admit her own role in what happened.
She makes a habit of verbally (and physically) abusing Jamie. When he finally snaps and hits her back, she mocks him claiming that he isn't a "real man" because he can't restrain himself... having already mocked him repeatedly for being too weak to fight back. What's worse, he gets blamed by John for hitting her, while she gets off scot-free.
She also harbors resentment at Jamie after it's revealed that he funded an abortion for her as a teen (due to her Wild Child tendencies) that also included a hysterectomy, leaving her unable to bear children. The only time we hear her give the closest thing to an explanation is when she tells Rip in Season 3 that it's one of two decisions she ever made that were based on fear, though this doesn't change how she acts towards Jamie.
The Dreaded: She's more-or-less considered to be this by Bob Schwartz and Caroline Warner for her cutthroat nature gobbling up smaller firms for their interests, to such an extent that the latter outright calls her a "monster" in Season 4.
Drink-Based Characterization: It's heavily implied that she took up drinking whiskey in an effort to avoid nightmares and traumatic incidents in her past, as she tells her father in Season 4 that she needs at least five more glasses "just to sleep". This is said after she's explicitly told her father that she's gone back on the wagon in an attempt to alleviate her habit.
Driven to Suicide: This is the implied endgame that Beth has in mind for her enemies, especially Jamie. She doesn't want to kill people she hates, she wants to break them down psychologically until they do it themselves. Her most blatant attempts are her cuckolding of Jenkins, and giving Jamie a Suicide Dare.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: She's the most amoral of the Duttons and at times is confused to why John reprimands her on a lot of her actions stating it's far to cruel. Best shown when John tells her to take it easy on Jamie after he attempted suicide, Beth sees nothing wrong with her abusing him like she always has.
Evil Is Petty: Beth's character is defined by being able to Kick the Dog whenever she can, no matter how small the slights against her are.
Fan Disservice:
The series highlights this early in the first season, when she disrobes and takes a bath in a horse trough (completely averting Scenery Censor in the process) — but the reason why she's doing so is because she's drinking to forget her mother's death and angrily yelling at Jamie, gives a Death Glare at her father's new paramour, and is heard telling Rip that "everybody suffers today, even you" as she stalks off naked, despite his attempts to get her to cover up.
A love scene she has with Rip late in Season 4 is marred by the fact that the camera takes pains to show her Toplessness from the Back — where the audience can see a massive burn scar (caused by the explosion she was caught in at the end of Season 3) that runs nearly the entire length of her back.
Fatal Flaw: Her hatred of Jamie. Because of what happened between them, Beth made it her life goal to ruin Jamie's anyway possible, ethics and morals be damned. This also makes her predictable and Jamie correctly guessing when she'll do something evil. The final season shows this to be the undoing of the Dutton family as a whole. Her father is murdered and she and Kayce are forced to sell the ranch and everything in it just to pay for what they owe and the family name is ruined precisely because Jamie correctly guessed she'd do something unhinged.
For the Evulz: Beth admits to Monica that all the mean things she has said and done were for fun.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: For all her hatred of Jamie and blaming him of her problems, Beth's actions to him and everyone else around her are needlessly cruel, selfish and downright childish. That her abusing others around her, even Rip when they were teenagers, who did nothing to deserve such cruel treatment, makes her actions come off as monstrous and no better than many of the enemies she goes up against, especially with her refusal to accept responsibility or culpability for her actions and their consequences.
Green-Eyed Monster: She hates that she can't have children, and her hatred of Jamie only intensifies upon discovering he has a son, to which she is so frantically mad she even vows to kill his infant son to spite him.
Happily Married: To Rip Wheeler, as of the Season 4 finale.
Hidden Depths: It's revealed in Season 3 that the reason why she hates Jamie is because the latter funded an abortion after she got pregnant as a teenager — but didn't tell her initially that the procedure would include a hysterectomy, which has left her unable to have children. The action is shown to have fueled her animosity towards him for many years.
Hidden Heart of Gold: Though sometimes it’s simply Protagonist-Centered Morality, she has her moments that shows Beth isn't a complete monster. Unfortunately, these moments are relatively rare and she usually lets her sadistic side get the best of her.
Hypocrite:
One of the things she likes to call out Jamie for is acting like a "Well Done, Son" Guy, ignoring that she is just as much, if not more.
Although she often argues with her father about his decisions, she has shown time and time again how her obsession to never disappoint him prevents her to go further than that.
It's All About Me: Baring her father and Rip, she's perfectly willing to cross whatever lines she wants to get what she wants for herself.
Jerkass: That's the nicest that can be said about her. Beth is cruel, selfish, and an amoral sociopath who has no lines she's willing to cross to hurt those around her, especially Jamie.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: You would think Beth would have some measure of familial love to Jamie seeing how distraught he is over killing someone. Nope. She talks like she feels for him, but then coldly tells him to kill himself while smugly walking away.
Jerkass Has a Point: Beth loves tearing into Jamie at every opportunity, calling him a spineless asshole who is only loyal to himself. But her abuse seems to turn her accusations into a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy, driving Jaime to finally think of himself rather than the family who abuses him.
Jerkass to One: While Beth is always rude and condescending towards people, she noticeably acts more cruel and abusive to Jamie, expressing more joy in Jamie’s suffering than she does towards other peoples. This stems from Jamie allowing Beth to be sterilized when she was a teen.
Karma Houdini:
She horribly abuses Jamie on a regularly basis saying horrible things or beating on him, yet she receives no punishment largely because John clearly favors her over Jamie.
Downplayed in the finale. She kills Jamie and ruins his reputation while moving with Rip to start over in Texas and gets away with the countless atrocities she's done to others with barely a slap on the wrist. However, her family name is forever ruined, her father is dead, and the ranch the Dutton family fought for decades to keep is now gone.
Karma Houdini Warranty:
While she survives the ordeal by the Beck Brothers in season 2, her face is heavily scarred and is left emotionally damaged forever. Given how much of a monster she is...
When she confronts Jamie demanding he step down less she reveal the blackmail she has on him, only for Jamie to finally stand up to her cruel behavior revealing her blackmail is worthless that if she does it, it will reveal all the dead bodies their father, Rip, and others on the ranch have killed at the train station and that for all her manipulations, she has no legal rights to the ranch. This results in Beth having a massive breakdown and going as far as to beg her father to kill Jamie.
While she does ends up killing Jamie in the finale like she always wanted, she loses the ranch, the family name and fortune to pay for the debts, her actions helped get her father killed and is forced to leave to Texas with Rip to start over, rendering all of her actions throughout the series All for Nothing due to her hatred of Jamie.
Kick the Dog: She does this as easy as breathing. Nearly all of her appearances with Jamie have her being needlessly cruel or dismissive towards her brother and never even tries to be nice to him.
Lack of Empathy: Good Lord is she. She's basically incapable of showing remorse for her actions and frequently relishes in the pain and suffering she causes to everyone around her, Jamie especially. She even threatened Jamie's son, who is an infant just to spite him—-by far the most amoral thing she's ever done.
Lady Drunk: Her establishing character moment has her partaking in this, as she browbeats a business associate (while slightly tipsy) into surrendering his company to her. Further episodes posit that she's a functional drunk, and that she does so to mask her depression and trauma from past events. She is eventually swayed by her father to lessen her reliance on drinking (particularly after she gets married) and more-or-less steps away from this role by Season 3. Sort of.
Laser-Guided Karma: As mentioned previously, while she "wins" (for a given definition of "wins") and survives while Jaime doesn't, her cruel, amoral, and downright evil ways come back to bite her in the ass as the Duttons' family reputation crumbles in the wake of John's death, leaving the family in debt and, to settle them, they are forced to sell the ranch — the same one she was so gleefully willing to Kick the Dog in the name of in the first place.
Locked Out of the Loop: Surprisingly, she was unaware of the Train Station before Jamie revealed it to her during season 5. This throws a wrench in her blackmail against him, as he dumped his father's body in the same location. Leading the police to one would expose the other.
My Greatest Failure: Season 5 seems to suggest that Beth's treatment of Rip as a teenager (and the loss of time she could have spent with him instead of playing the field) is part of the reason she suffers from relationship issues, as she tearfully apologizes to him for everything she's done early on in Season 5.
Never My Fault: Like a true sociopath and abuser, Beth almost never admits fault for her own shortcomings. She blames Jamie for the death of their father, ignoring she was the one who tried to kill Jamie and force his hand.
Psychopathic Womanchild: She's been described as having never grew out as a 14-year old Bratty Teenage Daughter even when she became an adult, with her moments of childishness cultivating in bullying and humiliating people, especially Jamie.
Really Gets Around: She makes no secret of the fact that she was a "bad girl" as a teenager and adult, though it's more-or-less said to have been a direct result of her mother's death and her own internal issues. Season 3 and Season 5 both feature flashbacks with at least one character (Jamie) talking about her loose reputation, while the latter has the teenaged Beth seduce a fellow rancher in full view of Rip before dragging the former into the back of a pickup truck.
Sadist:
She genuinely enjoys bullying and threatening people beneath her, and takes sick pleasure out of being cruel to her enemies. This goes double for Jamie.
She seems to have had this trait since her teens. Flashbacks in Season 5 show an incident where she purposely seduced a rancher bullying Rip (in full view of Rip) because she knew it would hurt him emotionally.
Shameful Strip: Subverted; in the penultimate episode of the series, it seems she'll have to do this in order to make Travis help her, as he's unwilling to leave his home otherwise. A few moments later, he tells her to stop and says he was just messing with her, and didn't actually think she'd do it.
Sore Loser: Being with her pride, she takes any loss very poorly, especially when Jamie manages to get one on her.
Token Evil Teammate: While the Dutton family and their associates in the Yellowstone Ranch are portrayed as Anti Heroes that are given an abundance of good qualities and reasons that prevent them from coming across as being too despicable, Beth leans much closer to being a Villain Protagonist and has much fewer redeeming qualities. It is also worth noting that unlike everyone else, including John Dutton, Beth is willing to ruin the lives of innocent people and may even get them killed to get what she wants, and is the only one who actually takes genuine sadistic pleasure in committing her atrocities.
Too Much Information: Makes a habit of revealing way too much information about her sex life, to the point that she tells her father at one point that "the blush got fucked out of me years ago," leading him to ask if that's really necessary to say.
Undying Loyalty: Like the rest of the Dutton clan, she's utterly ruthless in her quest to protect both her father and the ranch from outside influences — particularly because she has the intelligence and drive necessary to make a significant impact via her role as a corporate raider, which is used to great effect to destabilize several forces throughout the show.
Villainous Breakdown: Beth has one after hearing Jamie’s "The Reason You Suck" Speech. After learning that her blackmail against Jamie is useless, compounded with the knowledge that her father’s actions will only lead to the Ranch’s ruin, Beth is left in a state of shock, being incapable of doing anything but spewing insults at Jamie and later begging her father to kill Jamie.
Villain Has a Point: Though Beth may be cruel, petty, and vindictive, she does many times raise legitimate points about a situation, revealing things that are at least partially justified.
The Un-Favorite: Of her mother, Evelyn, before the latter died. This perception has led her to culminate a series of increasingly-frantic habits, including time as a Bratty Teenage Daughter and The Alcoholic.
Would Hurt a Child: Strongly implied she will try to kill Jamie's son, who is no more a toddler.
Xanatos Gambit: Season 4 has a long-form version of this, where (after being fired from Schwartz and Meyer), she is poached by Market Equities, led by Caroline Warner, and puts a plan into motion to functionally destroy the latter, even telling Caroline to her face about what she's going to do to her. The fact that her plan also lets her destabilize Schwartz and Meyer is seen as an unintended bonus for her.