Book Dumb: By his (and the wranglers') admission, he's "as dumb as a box of rocks", but makes up for it with a lot of enthusiasm and drive to better himself and make something out of his life.
Butt-Monkey: Starts out as the "low-man" at the ranch, being forced to take on the most menial and humiliating jobs and being treated as a pariah by the rest of the wranglers. As the seasons continue, though, he starts to gain more maturity and experience, leading to his Earn Your Happy Ending moment below.
Determinator: He gets repeatedly insulted and belittled (and even beaten by a larger man at one point) by other wranglers, but continues to persevere, despite a near-fatal neck injury and a stretch of time working at another ranch in Texas.
Earn Your Happy Ending: Gets one of the most pronounced changes out of any character in the series. After he's nearly killed during the rodeo-riding accident, John sends him to Texas to apprentice at the Four-Sixes Ranch, telling him it's the last chance he'll give him. Once there, Jimmy starts to seriously take his life choices into consideration (helped by the considerate wranglers at the ranch), works hard to become a cowboy and meets Emily (who loves him for who he is and not for who he might become), even getting engaged to her in the process. When he returns to Yellowstone, his new confidence and competence quickly earn him the respect of the other ranch hands. He impresses John so much that the latter forgives any obligations that Jimmy still has toward the Duttons and tells him to go back to Texas where he can be happy in his new life.
The Heart: The other characters don’t see him as such, but viewers might. Of all the main characters, he’s the only one who never bullies anyone else and/or directly takes a life. His entire character arc is trying to become the best man he can be, and being bullied for it the entire time.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: Played with. In Seasons 3 and 4, he expresses interest in rodeo-riding, and even has Lloyd spot him the cash (and Mia support him behind-the-scenes) to enter a riding contest. The resulting experience causes a near-fatal neck injury, his reputation to be left in tatters and Mia to functionally abandon him in his hour of need. John later tells him to give up the sport, and despite his efforts to continue, he finally realizes his efforts were for naught when Rip brings him to a professional rodeo contest, where he sees just how big the difference is with professional riders, and elects to pursue a different path.
Love at First Sight: Happens with Mia, and a couple seasons later, with Emily at the Four-Sixes Ranch.
Took a Level in Badass: His time at the Four-Sixes in Season 4 not only leads him to become a more mature, level-headed individual (even shepherding a relationship that turns into an engagement), but his training gives him the confidence to take part in difficult herding operations without any complaint whatsoever. By the time he shows up at the Dutton ranch again, he's an extremely-skilled roper who shows up the rest of the wranglers.
Training from Hell:
Being the "low-man" at the ranch, he gets roped into a number of humiliating tasks, including planting dynamite with Rip and an associate in the pilot to deny Jenkins area advantage against the ranch, being duct-taped to a wild stallion for hours (and being harassed by Fred when he's too tired to take a shower) and getting mocked by other wranglers when his own horse flips him off during a task to herd numerous bulls back to the ranch. With the exception of Lloyd, nearly everyone mocks and insults him for his first few weeks on the ranch, and still bullies him long afterwards
Deconstructed. None of the training Jimmy receives at Yellowstone actually teaches him anything, and he mostly has to figure things out on his own. It's only after he's sent to Four-Sixes Ranch, where the ranchers are much more patient and considerate, that he becomes a competent rancher.