Achilles in His Tent: The series starts with Kayce being a glorified gofer for the Broken Rock Tribe, who is forced to run menial jobs and act subservient to individuals like Robert Long, even ignoring his family's requests to help during a cattle dispute initiated by the Tribe. It isn't until his brother is shot down by Robert that it immediately becomes clear why he wanted to stay out of the fight — he was a former Navy SEAL who quickdraws a fellow combat veteran to save his brother's life, though the latter eventually succumbs to his wounds. It gets played with as his tendency to be passive and reactionary is a major contributor as to why he's in a bad situation, if Kayce had done anything to stop the CainAndAbelfeud between Jamie and Beth or even done a Calling the Old Man Out with John none of the tragedy would have occured in the first place. And while it's clear that selling the farm is meant to be a allegory for growing up and forging your own path, Kayce ends the show coming off as a coward
Bad Ass Driver: In the fourth-season premiere, Kayce goes full kamikaze on a bad guy's fleeing van, ramming it into a spin right off the road when it crosses an intersection. He's able to maintain enough control to keep his truck going fairly straight and come safely to a stop.
Badass in Distress: He is shot in the side by one of the Montana Free Militia attackers in the fourth-season premiere, and spends the better part of two months having to recuperate.
Crazy-Prepared: The fourth-season premiere reveals that he keeps a flash bang in his office and a fully automatic rifle in his truck. He uses the former to dazzle the militia members sent to kill him, then uses the latter to go full-on Terminator mode against the remaining attackers.
Defector from Decadence: The reason why he went to live in the Broken Rock Reservation prior to the events of the series, eschewing the lifestyle that came from living with one of the most affluent and politically-powerful families in Montana, is due to John branding him when he refused to force Monica to abort her unborn child.
Elites Are More Glamorous: A former U.S. Navy SEAL who saw combat in Afghanistan. As such, he is easily the most lethal member of the cast.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He's gruff like most of the cast, but he's by far the most moral of the Duttons and a pretty decent guy when you get to know him.
The Kirk: “I’ve killed more men than anyone you know, but I am NOT a murderer.” His role in the family. Essentially, he is the only Dutton that gets along with all the Duttons, and in turn the only Dutton all the other Duttons have a positive opinion of.
Love at First Sight: It’s all but openly stated this is what happened with Kayce and Monica.
Kayce: Trying to remember what I was wearing the day I met you.
Monica: All I remember is, you weren’t wearing it for long.
Manly Tears: The death of his unborn child in Season 4, caused after Monica is involved in a car accident that causes injuries to her midsection) causes this.
Parental Favoritism: John Dutton makes no secret of the fact that Kayce is his favorite child (and everyone knows he was his mother's favorite) and heir apparent, the one he plans to leave Yellowstone to. Surprisingly, unlike other examples, this does not earn him the ire of his two other siblings because they both get along with him. In fact, their love for Kayce is pretty much the ONLY thing Jamie and Beth agree on.
Pet the Dog: Unlike John and Beth who regularly abuse Jamie to no end, Kayce genuinely loves him like a true brother and is always kind to him. Jamie especially reciprocates this brotherly love, admitting to Beth he intends to leave the ranch to Kayce's son Tate when he's older. When he finds out that his biological father tried to have the Duttons killed, Kayce was the only one he was concerned about.
Underestimating Badassery: It becomes clear that several of the Duttons' enemies, including Robert Long, Dan Jenkins and the Beck brothers / Montana Free Militia, either don't know who he is or don't expect that he'll go after them at the behest of his father. This leads to predictably-fatal consequences for the majority of the attackers.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With Avery (who falls in Love at First Sight) in seasons 1, 2 and 4, though it's one-sided. She tells Kayce later that she loved him from the moment she saw him, and eventually left the ranch and went to go back to live with her family because it threatened her focus. When they see each other again in Season 4, this subject is discussed, leading Kayce to claim that he wouldn't leave Monica, but she subsequently appears to him during his vision quest towards the end of the season.