Apologetic Attacker: In Season 4, he apologizes to Lloyd on two separate occasions before beating the latter senseless, due to the latter cultivating a senseless grudge against Walker over Laramie.
Asskicking Leads to Leadership: As part of the hypermasculine mindset of the series, anyone who crosses a line at the ranch gets a No-Holds-Barred Beatdown from him to set an example for the other wranglers. This is even invoked in Season 3, where Rip has to intentionally "lose" a fight against Kayce so that the wranglers will accept the latter as their new boss.
Big Damn Heroes: He shows up to rescue Beth in the nick of time from a kill squad sent by the Beck brothers (even getting shot twice in the process) in the second season.
Cannot Spit It Out: How his connection with Beth is shown at the beginning of the series; they dated as teens, but he's refrained from getting close to her, even though he's completely smitten with her and initially taken aback at her dating other men. It takes him rescuing her from Beck's men before he can finally admit how he feels about her.
The Determinator: His character in a nutshell – he's utterly ruthless in his pursuit of protecting the ranch from thieves, intruders and other threats, up to and including shrugging off serious injuries sustained in the line of work.
The Dragon: He's John Dutton's right hand man, and will do whatever it takes to protect the ranch – including killing people in cold blood. As seen in the show, Rip has never lost a fight and is arguably the toughest man on the ranch. Even when fighting Kayce (who's ex-military), it's implied that Rip let him win.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: To the point that OOC Is Serious Business. It's revealed late in Season 3 that (unlike what the flashback of his family's death showed), Rip went to some expense to give his mother a proper burial, paying a private gravedigger to do so. When he has the body exhumed to get her wedding ring, he's extremely apologetic over the matter, speaking to her and telling her about his relationship (and marriage proposal) with Beth.
Even Evil Has Standards: He's John's right-hand man and has no qualms in killing anyone who is a threat, but even he thinks the way John is such an Abusive Parent to Jamie is needlessly cruel. When Jamie tries to argue with John and seeing John shove him to the ground and start punching him, Rip stops him from abusing Jamie and much later even tells off John for the way he treats Jamie.
Hair-Trigger Temper: It doesn't take much to get him going, and he can be seen routinely snapping at Jimmy (telling him to "shut the fuck up"), Lloyd (in Season 4)… or anything else that draws his ire.
Happiness in Slavery: This is a big part of Rip's personality. He essentially is John's lifelong slave, but is totally fine with this and completely loyal to John – mostly because he had nowhere else to go. Getting to be in a relationship with Beth also is a big reason.
Hidden Heart of Gold: He may be utterly ruthless (up to and including murdering people at John's request)… but put him in a room with either Beth or other children, and he completely melts.
Made of Iron: Rip is the toughest person on the ranch and has never lost a fight. He even accidentally kills someone in a fight in a flashback, which binds him to the ranch.
Major Injury Underreaction: As invoked when he comments on the bullet wounds he sustained saving Beth from Beck's men – "(I feel) like hell – but I was built to go through hell."
OOC Is Serious Business: His relationship with Beth, which is an open secret around the ranch. Their courtship and wedding is full of this, as he's completely uneasy about the situation, even admitting his fears to Lloyd (who serves as best man).
Pet the Dog: He and Jamie hardly interact and, while neither really like each other, Rip was touched that Jamie admits he thinks of him as a friend. He also stood up for Jamie over John's abuse towards him to remind him Jamie is still his son.
Start of Darkness: His ruthless tendencies were motivated by a childhood trauma he suffered, where he killed his father after the latter killed the rest of his family. This, combined with his respect for John (who took him in and treated him like a son) has effectively made him The Dragon for the ranch's operations, keeping the other wranglers in line. He has no problem killing people in cold blood.
Undying Loyalty: His key character trait. Rip will do anything to protect both John (who considers him to be Like a Son to Me) and the ranch and, as later episodes show, extends the same ideal to Beth, who he marries and promises to protect for the rest of her life.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: He has constantly been seeking approval from John since the latter took him in as a teen, and even accepts a demotion to a rank-and-file wrangler in Season 2 when John wants to give Kayce the experience necessary to lead the ranch. John rewards Rip by the end of the season with a house of his own, telling Beth after the fact that he knows very well (despite her initial anger towards John over the matter) who has been loyal to him from the get-go.