Always a Bigger Fish: All his attempts to build a casino on the site of the Yellowstone Ranch are functionally (and effortlessly) thwarted midway through Season 3, when Market Equities shows up and has his proposal 86'd in a matter of days. This indirectly leads him to ally with the Duttons against a common threat.
Awesome Moment of Crowning: His establishing moment is made of this, as he brings in a Senator specifically for the purpose of watching his coronation ceremony as the new Chief of the Broken Rock Tribe, complete with the presentation and donning of the ceremonial headdress.
Corrupt Corporate Executive: Starts out the series in this way, having indirectly organized an attack that led to the death of Lee Dutton. Rainwater combines this trope with Corrupt Bureaucrat as both the manager of an Indian casino and the chief of the Broken Rock Reservation, which has its own government. He's ruthless in his quest to take his tribe's land back from the American government by using any dirty trick at his disposal.
Enemy Mine: More-or-less gives up the fight with the Duttons in Season 3 so they can pool their resources and go after Market Equities together.
Heel–Face Revolving Door: Relaxes his antagonistic attitudes towards the Duttons at several points to help them against common enemies, including their fight against the Becks and Market Equities, and him delegating resources to help the family rescue Kayce and Monica's son Tate from a white supremacist compound.
Hypocrite: Early on in the first season, after he's arrested in connection for his plan to steal the livestock from the Dutton farm (and waxes on about the indignities his people have faced historically), he gets called out by John while in lockup due to the fact that he (Rainwater) is a Corrupt Corporate Executive that spent the last two decades working a high-powered job, making his claims that he's being marginalized when he did the exact same thing to other parties (via his work in Mergers and Acquisitions) hollow.
Jurisdiction Friction: Frequently runs into friction with John and the Duttons due to the latter holding on to land he considers the property of the Broken Rock Tribe — even holding a splashy press conference to say he's taking the land back for the tribe.
Morality Pet: No matter what he thinks of the rest of the Duttons or how much he hates the fact that they own a massive tract of land, he holds Kayce (Monica's husband, and functionally an honorary member of the tribe) in high esteem, advising him at numerous points and treating him more like a nephew than anything else.
Pragmatic Villainy: In a nutshell. He hates the Duttons for holding on to land he considers to have been stolen from his tribe — but once the chips are down and they both have to deal with outside threats, he makes it clear that he'll help them do what is necessary to repel the threat.
Wins by Doing Absolutely Nothing: He ends up getting the entire Yellowstone Ranch almost effortlessly after Market Equities murders John Dutton. This leads Kayce to sell the ranch to Rainwater (on the condition it becomes a wilderness area, ensuring it will never be developed by anyone) as a final 'fuck you' to Market Equities, albeit with some sabotage against said company on Rainwaters' part (which was probably going to happen anyways due to ME threatening the reservation).