Acrofatic: Despite being overweight in his early teenage years, he's good at sports. He places third at a swim meet after narrowly missing out on second place and later joins the high school football team, where he becomes a defensive captain after starting off as a bench player.
Ancestral Name: Named after his father, Anthony.
Beard of Sorrow: Grows one during his breakup with Blanca and suicide attempt.
Be Careful What You Wish For: Moves in with his father for a while when his parents are separated because Carmela disciplines him, but it doesn't work as Tony is not a fun pushover.
Big Little Brother: Robert Iler hit a growth spurt between Seasons 2 and 3, which makes AJ taller than Meadow throughout the rest of the series.
Book Dumb: His academic record is mediocre at best. One of his high school teachers even refers to him as "Fredo Corleone." Eventually, he flunks out of junior college and gives up on education altogether.
Brilliant, but Lazy: "Brilliant" is stretching it but there are hints throughout the series that AJ is a bit brighter and more capable than he appears and could do decently well at a few things, such as construction work, event planning, business management, and even school work if he ever put in the effort. Not to mention that he becomes more interested in 'intellectual' topics towards the end of the series, such as philosophy and politics. In the end, AJ's biggest character flaw is that he is not exactly lazy, but tends to cut corners and break the rules while doing so, much like his father.
Bungled Suicide: Late in Season 6, AJ attempts to drown himself in the backyard pool. His father saves him.
Butt-Monkey: Things seem to conspire against him.
He is found to have ADD, which limits his academic abilities to a significant extent.
Like his father, he has panic attacks and suffers from depression.
Romantically, he isn't exactly lucky, and a particularly unlucky relationship (with Blanca) leads to his depression becoming so severe that he attempts to end his own life.
Calling the Old Man Out: Openly critical towards his mother. His confrontations with Tony are rarer since his father is a fearsome guy who doesn't spare the rod.
Character Development: He becomes more cynical and socially aware in the final season. The finale implies that he might finally find a direction in life.
Conspiracy Theorist: He has a phase towards the end where he is obsessed with the government's involvement in Iraq, among other things.
Cynicism Catalyst: He falls to pieces when Blanca leaves him, growing angrier and angrier at the unfairness of the world, to the point that he attempts suicide.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: To the Michael Corleone stereotype, the White Sheep of a Mafia-affiliated family kept away from the family business by their mob boss father. However, Michael was a genuinely remarkable individual that had great potential outside of crime (war hero, college-educated etc.) while AJ is a directionless, irresponsible Lazy Bum that fails at or flunks out of basically everything he does. This is even Invoked when AJ tries to kill Junior as revenge for shooting Tony (and fails miserably) with Tony himself pointing out that The Godfather is just a movie. Overall, AJ can't rise up to the occasion and enter the mob life even if he wanted to, and lacks the skills necessary to make it in the honest world.
Dumbass Has a Point: He isn't exactly wrong when he calls out Tony or Carmela for their hypocrisy or points out social injustice and crises towards the end.
Dumbass Teenage Son: He's lazy, irresponsible, not very bright overall, and is never shown with a grade higher than a C. He's also a teenager who is Tony and Carmela's son.
Dumb Jock: He's a good football player at least.
Dumb Muscle: Very briefly in the last season, and a half-assed example at that.
The Eeyore: From spoiled brat to depressive teen, the rest of his family invariably finds him a huge drag. However, considering he takes his lead from his father, it's understandable he would struggle to find positive thought.
Embarrassing Browser History: When the Feds pay a visit to the Soprano home, Meadow reminds him that he should make sure that they don't see the porn he has on his computer.
Expository Hairstyle Change: His longer hair in the first half of season six signifies his character becoming more of a loose cannon. The most notable example of this is when he tries to kill his Uncle Junior for his shooting of Tony.
Felon's Failson: A.J. is a Spoiled Brat and Lazy Bum who repeatedly flunks out, struggles to keep minimum wage jobs outright handed to him on a silver platter, and doesn't even realize his father is a mobster until his sister outright tells him. Tony struggles with the inadequacy of his son repeatedly, but understood quickly that, despite the importance of family ties in his line of work, he would keep A.J. as far from it as possible, since a sheltered kid like him would never survive.
Foil: To Tony and Livia both. He inherits their depressive worldviews, narcissistic tendencies, and amoral nature. However, he completely lacks their intelligence, independence, charisma, and grit, making him extremely ineffective as a student, adult, romantic partner, or criminal.
Indirectly, he serves as an example of the negative outcomes of the American experiment and the consequences of tireless positive reinforcement and self-affirmation (through Carmela's protectiveness, schooling, and psychiatry) without authoritative parenting, moral guidance, and personal struggle.
Livia, who had none of those benefits, is perfectly capable of sustaining a self-directed life, even if she was a depressed narcissist, emotional abuser, and filicidal parent—she still survived The Great Depression and life as a housewife to an exceptionally violent and neglectful husband. Tony, who grew up in a bad neighborhood, suffered under Livia's thumb but has access to some of the benefits of the American environment, may still be a depressive, cold-blooded criminal who uses therapy as a crutch to justify his behavior but has a better relationship with his family and remains an effective and charismatic leader capable of effecting results upon his surroundings.
In contrast, AJ has all of their faults, but very little impetus to develop their strengths, and his resulting ineffectiveness is the primary reason he is unable to become an effective criminal like his father. He is thus a counter to Tony's belief that all he needed in his own childhood was a loving mother - AJ has this, but lacks everything else required to become a successful and independent adult.
He can also be compared to his aunt Janice, both being the foolish sibling of their respective generations and are seen as continuous burdens on the rest of the family. They also espouse fairly shallow countercultural political leanings. However, Janice is an unrepentant leech who remains shameless in her involvement in the Mafia while AJ at least has some hope of a life outside of it.
Follow in My Footsteps: Defied by Tony, who is more than aware that AJ is not capable of surviving in the Mafia. So we never ever see AJ at the Bing or Satriale's.
Foolish Sibling, Responsible Sibling: The "foolish" to Meadow's "responsible". AJ is shown to be a terrible student and has no work ethic, resulting in him eventually flunking out of college and having limited career prospects. However, by the end of the series this becomes somewhat blurred as it's shown that, unlike Meadow, he has avoided getting dragged into the world of the mafia and has a shot at a life outside while Meadow is implied to be on track to become a mob lawyer.
Formerly Fat: Loses quite a bit of weight over the course of the show (particularly around Season 4), and grows enough that he's practically lanky compared to what he was as a child.
Freudian Excuse: Tony really has no idea what he's doing as a father to AJ; his emotional neglect, verbal abuse, and incredible Parental Hypocrisy in combination with Livia's negative influence lead to AJ developing a very cynical and nihilistic worldview and very poor work ethic. Carmela spoiling him with luxuries in combination with her fear of empty nest syndrome only makes things worse by making AJ more despondent and dependent into his adult years. That's in addition to AJ being raised in an environment that even his far more intellectual sister wasn't able to escape unscathed from.
Friend to All Children: He gets along great with Blanca's son Hector.
Hidden Depths: Despite being commonly viewed as being a lazy dumbass, an admittedly not totally inaccurate view, AJ does often show throughout the series that he's got more going on underneath:
In the fifth season, he shows a genuine aptitude for event organization. He throws a backyard party with his friends and nets himself a $300 share after expenses.
While dating Blanca, he makes a genuine effort to be a good boyfriend and independent provider and, despite being forced into it by Tony, takes to construction work quickly and makes a sincere effort at it, even impressing his parents with his work ethic and coming to enjoy the work. Later, when working at a pizza restaurant, he expresses a desire to work in the restaurant business and it's implied he's doing pretty well in his present role.
With the benefit of hindsight, AJ fits very well the profile of a child who doesn't excel at academia or extracurriculars, but thrives on mentorship and tradecraft as shown when he does well in and makes an effort in construction and managing a pizza restaurant. It's just that his father doesn't want to mentor him in his own trade and his mother insists on the academia route even though he's not suited for it.
He occasionally shows a genuine interest in history, knowing on his own who Sacco and Vanzetti were in the first season when they are brought up, reading about Christopher Columbus and forming a much more critical view of his actions in contrast to the rest of his family's hero worship and sincerely enjoying history classes in college that deal with the Middle East conflict, even if the social climate of The War on Terror eventually plays a part in his later decline.
When he and Devin visit Meadow in New York in the fourth season while she is working as a legal aid for disenfranchised people, he's taken aback at the brutal conditions many of her clients live in and struggles after with the guilt of seeing how bad others have it while he's lived a life of luxury. It's noticeably the first time in the series he expresses any real introspection and shows he's capable of such.
Hollywood Genetics: The showrunners clearly expected Robert Iler to look more like James Gandolfini as he aged. As an adult, AJ is half the size of his father Tony, and looks nothing like him. Indeed, they went in opposite directions as far as their relative weights were concerned, with Tony becoming bigger and A.J. being a rather slender circa 20-year old as opposed to an overweight kid. Tony finally acknowledges it in the final season, handwaving it by saying that he takes after his wife's family.
I Got Bigger: He is about 12 at the start of the series and 22 at the end. During this time, there are many long gaps between seasons which mean that the effects of puberty are particularly noticeable.
His post-puberty voice seems to have become set-in-stone by season three, but he goes through many more appearance changes over the following seasons.
It Runs in the Family: The panic attacks and depression come from his dad.
More darkly, the final episode implies he has also inherited his cruelty and lust for violence, and that perhaps his depression was ultimately the result of these needs going unfulfilled due to a lifetime of being shielded from his family's work. In particular, the uplifting joy he describes feeling by narrowly escaping the SUV fire mirrors how Tony escaped his own depression by evading the hit put upon him in Season 1 - something that also involved an SUV accident.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He ranges from bratty to miserable to selfish throughout most of the series, but at times he is shown to have a heart. This is particularly evident during his relationship with Blanca and how he sacrifices his bike for her and her son's benefit.
Lazy Bum: Tony notes that A.J. shrinks away from anything that involves work.
Like Father, Like Son: Judging by his relationships on the show, AJ seems to have inherited his father's ability to attract and have relationships with women who are way out of his league looks-wise.
Like Father, Unlike Son: Zigzagged. On the one hand, the lazy, timid and directionless AJ is nothing like the hot-blooded, decisive, and ruthless Tony. On the other, a few characters have pointed out that AJ's laziness and entitlement are qualities Tony also has and the final season confirms that he also inherited Tony's depression but even more severe, to the point of attempting suicide. On a more positive note, he also shows more capability of building a life away from the mafia than Tony ever did and is far more capable of empathy and genuine kindness. In general, AJ serves as a mirror to Tony's own feelings, both in-universe and out, and is frequently the target of Tony's more negative thoughts about himself.
The Load: While under duress, Carmela once told him to his face that he is "a cross that the rest of his family has to bear", a description AJ was clearly hurt by.
Manchild: By the time AJ reaches young adulthood, he's still acting like a lazy and spoiled teenager. After Tony has to step in to keep AJ from being charged for attempting to kill Junior, he flat out tells AJ he's not a little kid anymore and he can't keep bailing him out from serious trouble like this.
AM/FM Characterization: Throughout the series, he's portrayed as a fan of heavy metal, via product placements (shirts, coats, posters, and stickers) of bands like Pantera, Nevermore, Mudvayne (whose concert he attends in "All Happy Families"), Slipknot, Coal Chamber, Stuck Mojo, Machine Head, and Fear Factory. By the end of the series, having grown more worldly and introspective, he discovers and begins analyzing the early work of Bob Dylan.
Mistaken for Gay: Tony suspects that AJ may have been engaging in homosexual activities during his stay at the suites in New York. He also thinks that AJ's interest in becoming an event manager is 'a bit gay'.
Never My Fault: He struggles to accept any responsibility for what he's done, just like his parents.
Pyromaniac: Implied towards the end, when he credits breaking out of his depression to the excitement of watching his SUV accidentally catch fire.
Real Life Writes the Plot: Iler slimmed out over the course of the show, so the show added dialogue in which AJ complains about the healthiness of the food his parents are serving, and Tony gripes about his "obsession" over his weight.
The Slacker: Definitely the lazier of the two siblings; he doesn't once look like he's interested in anything involving actually working towards his goals. This can be at least partially explained by his later depression diagnosis.
Spoiled Brat: Deconstructed. On the surface, A.J. is basically the living embodiment of the rudderless, spoiled rich kid. Upon closer inspection, it's clear that his arc is one of the most realistic examples of a kid developing juvenile depression. For those who have lived through it, he checks literally every symptom ("laziness", nihilism, low self-esteem, and finally "broken heart" trigger).
Successful Sibling Syndrome: He openly admits to others that he feels that he can't measure up to Meadow's success.
Stealing from the Till: Fired from his job at Blockbuster for stealing promotional items.
Took a Level in Cynic: While he was never a well-behaved kid, the early episodes showed that he was mostly happy and optimistic. Then when he learns the truth about Tony's profession, he loses a lot of his innocence. It gets worse when he spends one-on-one time with Livia and her negative influence lead to AJ developing a very cynical and nihilistic worldview that he keeps for the rest of the series.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Downplayed, he's an attractive enough adult but he has a number of love interests who are considerably better looking than him.
Unconfessed Unemployment: At one point, he tells Carmela everything was "fine" at Blockbuster, despite having been fired for three weeks.
The Un-Favorite: AJ claims that the overachiever Meadow is the family favorite over him, the screw-up, but she counters that, as Italian-Americans, their parents will always favor their son.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: It was through him that Livia found out that Tony was seeing a psychiatrist.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: The first couple of seasons show him to be a mostly good-natured, if flawed, adolescent. Then he turns into someone who causes mayhem at school (to the point of being expelled), following by a particularly bratty teenage phase during his parents' separation. This is talked about by Carmela at one point.
Virgin-Shaming: Despite the audience having seen him dating a few girls, A.J. still gets mocked by his father in this way.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: Wants to live up to his father's perceived expectations, but fails. A tragic example has him trying to emulate Michael Corleone's rise by attempting to kill Junior.
In general, it's suggested that he has a very bad experience with trying to navigate this with Tony. Tony loves being proud of him, but he's not good at being encouraging one-on-one as a young person, and he can't share details of his own work to inspire him.
White Sheep: None of the Sopranos are what you could call good people, but AJ could be seen as this for them by the finale, albeit more for lacking any extreme negative traits than possessing particularly positive ones. He lacks his father's violent and aggressive nature and his mother and sister's hypocrisy and undeserved sense of self-righteousness, and the finale even implies he has a chance of creating a life away from the mob while Meadow is about to be dragged into it.
Wise Beyond Their Years: Zigzagged. In his teen years, A.J. alternates between being interested in the works of Nietzsche and being a fairly standard, bratty teenager.