Affably Evil: Junior is generally a genial and friendly old man with a wicked sense of humor, so long as you don't get in his way.
Alas, Poor Villain: His last appearance in Season 6's episode "Made in America". It is clear that his Alzheimer's has progressed to the point he is unaware of his surroundings and remembers nothing of his past other than playing catch with Tony. Seeing what his uncle has become almost reduces Tony to tears.
All for Nothing:
Much of his time in the series is spent trying to avoid being convicted and sent to prison for racketeering charges. He eventually succeeds after several years of house arrest, but he soon develops dementia and is permanently confined to a mental institution after mistaking Tony for a long-dead enemy and shooting him, rendering the entire endeavour pointless.
Most of the first season is a broiling conflict between Tony and Junior over leadership of the crime family. It's ultimately made a moot point by the end of the season due to a Deus ex Machina, where the FBI indicts Junior on charges that been completely unmentioned until that point, taking him out of the conflict without Tony having to do anything. It gets even worse when he develops dementia and it worsens to the point he can't even remember he was ever a mobster or who Tony even is.
Amnesiacs Are Innocent: Inverted. When he intentionally orders a hit on his nephew Tony, everyone (except for Carmela) gradually forgives him and forgets about it, even though it was only by pure luck (and the incredible incompetence of the hitmen) the whacking failed and a Deus ex Machina kept Junior from being able to try again. Later, when Junior, suffering from dementia, mistakes Tony for a long-dead gangster and almost fatally shoots him, everyone completely shuns him, despite the fact he clearly wasn't in his right mind and doesn't even remember shooting Tony.
Apparently Powerless Puppetmaster: Played With. After a brief power struggle in the first few episodes, his nephew Tony allows him to believe he's The Don while Tony is the de facto boss. However, Junior still tries his best to leverage his seniority and the loyalty of his underlings to run things behind Tony's back, undermining and even attempting to organize a hit on his nephew. Afterward, he's arrested and put under house arrest to await trial (not for the hit; the authorities had been building a case against him for years and the timing is just coincidental). Junior agrees to continue playing the part to avoid retribution from Tony and continues to advise him throughout the series. To the feds, of course, he plays the part of a bemused senior who doesn't know anything, while simultaneously trying to act tough and in control around Tony and the other gangsters; the truth is somewhere in the middle, and as he gets older he begins to show signs of genuine dementia.
The Artifact: He is the main antagonist in the first season, but is relegated to a lesser supporting role after being busted at the end of the first season. His relevance to the plot becomes little more than that of a wise old hand, although he notably carries out the crucial act of shooting Tony in the first episode of Season 6A.
Asshole Victim: Deconstructed. While it's clear that Junior living in a shitty nursing home, isolated from his family is a fitting punishment for someone who preyed on his community for decades without any sort of remorse or shame, getting Alzheimer's disease and having his mind slowly degrade to the point where he doesn't even recognize his own nephew anymore is such a pathetic and sad fate for the once powerful gangster that it's hard not to feel sorry for him. Even Tony is moved to tears once he realizes his uncle is gone for good and he'll never be able to reconcile or make things right with the old man.
Authority in Name Only: Junior is made de jure boss of the DiMeo family after Jackie Aprile Sr.'s death, and actually keeps the title for a few seasons despite Tony's role as de facto boss.
Bad Boss: Junior starts abusing his new power as boss almost immediately, taxing Tony's friend Hesh at the suggestion of Livia.
He has Donnie murdered for making jokes about Tony (someone who he himself is planning to murder) just because he thinks it means Donnie might be the type to insult him behind his back.
Bald of Evil: He's been bald since at least the seventies and is a vicious mob boss.
Batman Gambit: He claims in front of Tony Soprano that he was only feigning a conflict between Tony and himself in Season 2, believing that the aggressively ambitious Richie Aprile would take this as a sign that he was against his nephew. Richie would then reveal his plans to Junior who’d then reveal them to Tony. He was not wrong.
Subverted, however since he only told Tony this in order to convince Tony he was always on his side; he chose to reject Richie’s offer after finding out the other capos did not respect Richie and he would not be an effective leader.
Berserk Button: The mere implication that someone is laughing at him or making fun of him will set him completely off. He has Donnie whacked on the assumption he could be making jokes about him, and has Dickie Moltisanti whacked in the early seventies for laughing at him when he falls in the rain.
Big Bad Duumvirate: In Season 1 with Tony's mother, Livia. Their "kinship" ends after Junior realizes she was not only using him as a pawn to have her son murdered but was willing to let him take full blame for it if the feds found out what happened.
Butt-Monkey: Always suffering mishaps and embarrassments, whether getting his hand stuck down the plughole of his kitchen sink for 6 hours or discovering his capos have been working behind his back. After season 1, he spends the whole time either going stir-crazy under house arrest or suffering illnesses, finally developing dementia.
Call-Back: In the first episode of the series, Junior complains to Tony about the many hours he spent playing catch with him as a kid. In the last episode of the series, when Tony asks if he knows him, all Junior can recall is that he used to play catch with him. And with him unable to remember the animosity that later rose between him and his nephew, the memory now brings a slight smile to his face.
Cassandra Truth: He warns Tony early on that Christopher is a loose cannon. Tony comes to know this very, very well by the final season.
The Consigliere: While not his official role, he often acts as this for Tony in addition to Silvio, especially in Seasons 3 and 4. His decades of experience as well as him being an Excellent Judge of Character make him an effective advisor.
Deadpan Snarker: Says a witty, often dirty line every other episode.
Death Glare: Gives one to a courtroom artist whose rendition of him was not entirely flattering.
Demoted to Comic Relief: Downplayed. After he is placed under house arrest, he still makes significant contributions to the overall plot (such as shooting Tony, for example, but a big proportion of his house arrest era scenes are there to provide laughs above anything else.
Despair Event Horizon: Uncle Junior crosses it in "In Camelot" when he realizes that he's doomed to spend what's left of his life as a Confirmed Bachelor, and possibly under house arrest as well. He expresses Straw Nihilist views that there's no point to anything, and despairs that his efforts to stay out of prison have been All for Nothing.
Diabolus ex Machina: A number of events outside of his control conspire to oust Junior from the position of boss early on:
His preemptive hit on Tony goes belly-up because the hitmen Mikey Palmice hires to do the job decide that guns are close-range weapons.
Green Grove gets bugged in no small part because Tony decides to begin hosting his clandestine meetings with capos there behind Junior's back, leading to significant mafia traffic being observed by the feds at the retirement home. As a result, Junior's conversation with Livia about whacking Tony is recorded and used as evidence to have him arraigned.
The fastest handing down of federal indictments in the series sees him and his key players incarcerated and arraigned for grand jury within only a couple of months of his tenure, consolidating most of the power in Tony's hands.
Even after managing to avoid jail time by forcing a mistrial, Junior is unable to make any sort of comeback due to developing dementia almost immediately afterwards. His mental facilities quickly degrade and he's permanently confined to a psychiatric facility after shooting Tony in dementia-induced confusion.
Dirty Old Man: Junior is a shameless flirt and it gets him into trouble a few times. A nurse he regularly flirts with turns out to be an FBI plant and his downfall into senility starts when he turns around to greet an attractive reporter and hits his head on a boom mike.
The Don: Only in name, though.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: Junior chafes heavily at the very notion he's a puppet and loathes being denied the respect he feels is his due.
Due to the Dead: He seeks to attend the funerals of old acquaintances, but only because this frees him from his house arrest for a while.
Empty Shell: By the end of the series, Junior's Alzheimers has progressed to the point where there is nothing left of Corrado Soprano. He's just an old man who can't even remember anything about his life with little of his personality left. Even Tony is saddened to see his uncle in such a state.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
He doesn't stand for anyone ridiculing his institutionalized deceased brother, Ercole "Eckley" Soprano.
He clearly loved his mom, and remembers her with great admiration and affection.
For all their disputes, Junior does genuinely love Tony and treats him as the son he never had. He snapped at Richie Aprile for talking about a hit on Tony. Yes, he himself tried to have Tony killed just a season before, but that was more due to the Cosa Nostra code dictating Junior put the organization over his family. By the end of the show, the only memories he has left of Tony are not of the mob boss that usurped him but of the boy he used to play catch with.
Junior: That's my nephew you're talking about! How dare you in my own home!
Got on well with his sister-in-law Livia, sought her counsel often through his short tenure as boss, and was in genuine grief at her funeral.
Even Evil Has Standards:
Surprisingly, he thinks that Ralph Cifaretto's joke about Johnny Sack's wife was unfunny, and mentions that back in his day, mobsters would not be making these kinds of comments about each others' wives.
He is against selling drugs to children. When his tailor tells him his 14-year-old grandson was killed by a drug peddler, Junior is genuinely horrified and later has his men track down said dealer and off him in (almost) the exact same way the boy died.
He considers it embarrassing when mobsters run (literally) from awkward situations, although he ends up doing this himself later on.
Evil Is Petty: Hesh quite accurately describes Corrado as a man "driven entirely by insecurities." The Many Saints Of Newark reveals that it was he who had Dickie Moltisanti killed, for the crime of making him feel emasculated and laughing at him when he slipped in the rain. The guy's so insecure that he'll put his own nephew down over his failed football career, just to feel better about himself.
Evil Old Folks: In the first episode, he is plotting to kill a rival at his favorite restaurant. He becomes boss of the North Jersey mob shortly thereafter and conspires with Livia to kill Tony.
Evil Uncle: He conspires to have Tony killed on several occasions in the first two seasons.
Excellent Judge of Character: In contrast with Tony. Might have something to do with the big glasses. Tends to see people for exactly who they are, and, although he is susceptible to flattery, is very difficult to actually fool (unless you're a pretty woman returning his flirtations):
Junior sees Christopher for the liability he is very early on, and encourages Tony to have Christopher taken out more than once.
Although he collaborates with Livia, at her urging, to have Tony whacked, he is under no illusions about how conniving Livia can be, and immediately sees through her attempt to play senile following the failed hit. While Tony accuses Junior of having been played for a fool, there is truth to Junior's argument that he would have acted the same way without her influence, once he found out that Tony had been making moves behind his back to run the family, as this is a pretty standard no-no in the mafia. Furthermore, while Junior denies that Livia knew she was setting Tony up to be whacked, his earlier interactions with Livia, as well as Dr. Melfi's postulation that Corrado loves Tony, and wouldn't want to tell him information that would only hurt him, implies that he is being deliberately obtuse for Tony's, his own, and the family's benefit.
Warns anyone who comes into any kind of contact with his niece Janice about how dangerous she is, including Janice herself when he is suffering from dementia and can't actually recognize her in Season 6. No one listens, to their detriment. Janice is also generally unable to manipulate Corrado anywhere near as well as she can push Tony's buttons, as Corrado is fairly indifferent to her usual games (such as when she comes to see him about Bobby). In fact, Janice actually ends up helping Junior achieve his own ends instead (such as when she encourages Bobby to shake down a jointfitter's union rep on Junior's behalf).
Correctly surmises that no one likes Richie Aprile, and that throwing in with Richie is a bad idea. He turns out to be right, and tips off Tony about the planned coup. Although Tony plots to take him out, Janice beats him to the punch after shooting Richie in a domestic dispute. The tip still helps to get Junior back in Tony’s good graces, though.
He recognizes that Ralph Cifaretto is an excellent earner with superb managerial skills despite his many other flaws and encourages Tony to make him a captain before his resentment at being Passed-Over Promotion gets out of hand.
He concluded that Jackie Aprile Jr. was a moron who would never amount to anything when Jackie nearly drowned in a pool of water that was only three inches deep as a kid.
On a subtler note, he promotes Bobby Baccalieri to one of the highest positions in his own crew. Bobby turns out to be one of the most reliable, loyal, and levelheaded wiseguys around, in spite of his initial appearance to others as a coddled oaf.
He does have a blind spot for his surgeon John Kennedy, seemingly for no other reason than because the doctor shares a name with Junior's hero, despite the fact that he is an egotistical Jerkass who doesn’t always have his patients' best interests at heart.
Fatal Flaw:
Junior’s pride is the cause of most of his problems. In fact, his refusal to turn state’s witness against Tony is likely less about old-school values of mafia loyalty but rather that he refuses to admit his nephew outfoxed him and he was made boss in name only.
His deep sense of insecurity also causes a lot of strife and suffering for others, as he orders Mikey Palmice to kill Donnie just because he thinks Donnie could be cracking jokes about him next, as well as arranging Dickie Moltisanti's whacking for daring to laugh at his momentary weakness.
Lust is another one for him.
His philandering in Boca resulted in the conflict between him and Tony at the end of Season 1.
In season 3, he uses his doctor's office to conduct meetings with Tony, believing the feds can't bug the place. He is technically right, but he completely fails to realize the attractive nurse he was flirting with is actually an undercover FBI agent.
His flirting with a pretty reporter at the end of Season 4 causes a boom mic to hit him on the head and trip down a flight of stairs, which could be pointed to as the cause of his senility from Season 5 onwards.
Faux Affably Evil: Can be a kindly old gentleman, but he is someone who is willing to have members of his own blood family murdered.
Four Eyes, Zero Soul: He wears big thick-rimmed glasses and is a ruthless gangster even in his old age.
Grumpy Old Man: A fairly obvious example. In an early episode, Tony jokes about giving him his DVD player so he can watch Grumpy Old Men. This just annoys him further.
Hidden Depths:
He is an extraordinary singer. He literally brings a room full of mobsters to tears singing Core 'ngrato.
Despite being a Politically Incorrect Villain, he holds a rather progressive view towards the subject of mentally-disabled people, snapping at Tony for calling his brother Eckley "retarded" and lamenting that Eckley had been born in an age where people like him were frowned upon.
Hopeless with Tech: On one occasion he tries to make himself something in a blender, but fails to put the lid back on before turning it on. On another occasion he takes part in a meeting via a speaker phone and doesn't entirely grasp it.
How They Treat the Help: Played With. He's very abrasive towards Bobby, his loyal and resigned assistant. But he does authorize Bobby's "bump up", leading to him eventually becoming the third highest-ranking member of the crime family.
Humiliation Conga: After failing as a Big Bad in Season 1, he suffers increasing emasculation and eventual senility. It's equal parts hilarious and depressing.
Hypocrite:
He scoffs at Tony trying to kill his mother, conveniently ignoring he made the plan along with her first to kill him, who is also his nephew. Livia tried to kill him out of sheer pettiness for being transferred to a retirement home, whereas Junior wanted him dead because he was angry on Tony leading the family and was paranoid that he would overthrow him.
He scolds Big Pussy for trying to run from FBI agents, stating that it's undignified. But Junior himself does the exact same thing a year or two later when he sees FBI arresting members of his crime family at Jackie Aprile Jr.'s funeral.
I Fight for the Strongest Side!: He hedges his bets well in the conflict between Richie and Tony, eventually siding with the latter when the former fails to garner adequate support for his coup.
I Just Want to Be Loved: Displays shades of this; he is often surrounded by people who try to care for him (Bobby, Janice, and to an extent Tony) but his bitter personality and dementia eventually drive them away. Note that he himself ends a relationship with his girlfriend, Bobbi, for gossiping about his skill at performing cunnilingus, and abruptly truncates a promising budding relationship with Catherine Romano in Season 2.
Irony:
Towards the end of Season 1 when his mind is still fully intact, upon learning that Tony may be leaking mafia secrets to his therapist and is forced to live up to his title of boss, Junior makes the conscious decision of ordering a hit on his nephew. After the hit fails and most of Junior's crew is killed off, Tony and mostly everyone (sans Carmela) seem to forgive him for the deliberate attempt on his nephew's life. Fast forward five seasons when Junior's mind is clearly in the early stages of dementia and senility, he mistakenly confuses Tony with his long-dead nemesis "Little Pussy" Malanga and almost fatally shoots him. Despite not being in his right mind and having no memory of the incident, Junior finds himself shunned and ostracized from both his blood family and crime family for his actions, although Tony does seem to forgive him in the end.
In the pilot, he also holds the time he used to spend with Tony over his head, saying "how many fuckin' hours did I spend playing catch with you?!", as a sign that he'll never truly respect Tony's position as head of the family and always think of Tony as just his brother's son. By the finale, Junior has mentally deteriorated so badly that the only thing he can associate with Tony is a vague memory of playing catch, but has no idea what that means or who he is.
Early in the first season, in retaliation for imagined slights and insubordination, he sets up Christopher Moltisanti for a mock execution. In the prequel film The Many Saints of Newark, we see that he arranges a hit on Christopher's father, Dickie Moltisanti. And that one was fatal.
It's All About Me: The reason he's such a bad boss is because he's so greedy and selfish that he doesn't really share any of the profits with any of the other guys, which make them resent him. He's also prone to self-pity and making everything about him, much to the annoyance of his family and friends.
Jerkass: He's ruthless, egotistical, and often very emotionally stoic.
Jerkass Has a Point:
In season one, Tony repeatedly goes behind Junior's back and undermines his authority. Even after learning about Tony's therapy Junior tries to be lenient. As much as the audience may have an affinity for Tony, Junior actually has a strong The Dog Bites Back justification for his actions.
While several of Junior's criticisms of Tony's generation of mobsters are partly the result of his own Nostalgia Filter for his Glory Days, it's made clear throughout the series that he's not wrong that the younger generation causes several problems because they lack Junior's generation's intelligence and self-control (such as Ralph with the Ginny Sack joke).
Laser-Guided Karma: He initially fakes dementia in an attempt to get out of jail time, but in a form of ironic punishment, he ends up getting it for real. By the end of the series, he's left a shell of his former self, not even recognizing his own nephew.
Married to the Job: Never married, and his one stable relationship was ruined by the business and related gossip.
His decision to have Tony whacked in Season One also demonstrates this. Real-life Mafia code dictates that loyalty to the mob is expected to supersede loyalty to family. Thus, even though he doesn't actually want to kill his own nephew, he feels he must out of obligation to his duties as a mob boss.
Mentor Archetype: Tony seeks his counsel often, and for good reason, as Junior provides sound, experienced advice, before losing his marbles.
Narcissist: To essentially the same extent as Tony, although he has more explicit Kick the Dog moments to exhibit his own narcissism, such as expecting Bobby to quickly overcome his grief from the death of his wife in order to threaten a jointfitter's union official. Although whether this is due to genuine narcissism or his status as a curmudgeonly old man is subjective.
Neighbourhood-Friendly Gangsters: Junior liquidates Rusty Irish for selling drugs to children, which led to the grandson of Junior's tailor committing suicide. This is viewed as old-fashioned and the other capos resent him for it, as it was a bad business decision.
Nerd Glasses: Dominic Chianese has said the trademark oversized glasses are the character, and he would even wear them in all the rehearsals.
Noble Demon: Despite his villainy and callousness, deep down, he does love his nephew. And, throughout the series, he makes several attempts at healthy female relationships. Which, unfortunately, go sour once his ego and/or business acumen come into play. He also genuinely loves AJ and Meadow, his grand-nephew/niece, respectively.
Non-Action Big Bad: He's in his 70s by the time the series begins and he is never seen killing anyone personally. He does order a few murders, but he gets his minions to carry them out. However, Junior does lay a solid smackdown on Professor Lynch in "Remember When", so his toughness is not a completely Informed Attribute.
Not-So-Harmless Villain: Junior is old fashioned and Tony wields much more influence and muscle than him, indicating he intends to use Junior as a Puppet King. While Junior can seem silly, underestimating him is a very bad idea as nobody lasts as long as he does without having a dark sense of cunning and ruthlessness. Sure enough, crossing him gets a few people killed and he can be a legitimate threat to Tony.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Junior adopts this tactic in Season 4, feigning dementia to beat the competency hearings for his RICO trial. Later, it turns out that he is actually developing the condition. The series finale seems to indicate that Tony had assumed that Junior was, at least in part, still doing this even as his condition worsened in reality: by the time Tony figures out that the real dementia had overtaken the obfuscation years ago, it's too late and Junior has decayed past the point of even recognizing Tony.
Offing the Offspring: Attempted twice with Tony, the offspring of his brother but a son-figure nevertheless.
Vito: He Marvin Gayed his own nephew.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Everyone calls him Junior, except for Livia who simply calls him Corrado.
Out of Focus: Gradually appears less over the course of the series, particularly after his dementia sets in. He only appears in two of the final nine episodes.
Parental Substitute: In flashbacks, he is revealed to have been more of a father figure to his nephew than Tony's actual father, "Johnny Boy" Soprano, who largely neglected his family in favor of pursuing his own appetites and ambitions. A scene in The Many Saints of Newark shows him telling Johnny Boy that his duties "raising" Tony somewhat negatively impacted his looking after crime family affairs. Johnny was in prison for five years, so Corrado was around a lot more when Tony was a teenager.
Passed-Over Promotion: He is the heir apparent of the family, but Tony steps in and up.
The Peter Principle: It's shown that Junior is generally good when he's a capo or in a managerial role within the mafia, but once he's given the title of boss, his flaws come into play. His greed, selfishness, and stubborn adherence to old school principles alienates the other guys and gives Tony more legitimacy to become the boss.
Pet the Dog: During the first season, he genuinely seems to love his nephew, Tony, like a son despite growing increasingly resentful of his widespread influence within the DiMeo crime family. This is evidenced by his apparent unease over ordering Tony's assassination even while firmly believing that he poses an imminent threat to his position as boss. However, after Tony effectively strips him of all his power and influence by the beginning of Season 2, nearly all his feelings of affection towards his nephew are tainted by a deep-rooted contempt that endures throughout the remainder of the series.
He's genuinely horrified when he learns his longtime tailor lost his grandson and recalls when said grandson used to run about the store. He's furious at the drugs sold to children and asks for the drug dealer's name to have him killed.
In the second season, he tells Richie that he plans to give a pair of new sneakers to the impoverished kid who washes his car.
While he routinely gives him shit, he does care for Bobby. He tries to protect him by warning him about Janice and sends him some money for his family in season 6. He also gives Bobby a key bump up in rank in the family.
Playing Sick: Straight example to dodge criminal prosecution, and then ironically twisted as he is really going senile.
Pragmatic Villainy: While he's a bit old-fashioned in his mindset, he can be pragmatic when needed. He initially considered siding with Richie in Season 2. But after he assessed the situation and realized Richie wasn't respected enough to cement his authority, he decides things are better with Tony in charge and lets Tony in on Richie's plans so he can score some brownie points.
Puppet King: Tony sets him up as one in the aftermath of Jackie Aprile's death. Following Dr. Melfi's advice, Tony's plan is to allow Junior to be nominally in charge while Tony and his crew make the real decisions from behind the scenes. Unfortunately it doesn't play out that way. Junior eventually catches on to the true nature of the arrangement and tries to have Tony killed. Later Junior's arrest puts an end to what little power he actually had.
Sanity Slippage: Senile dementia. Showcased in two episodes of note. First, in "Where's Johnny?" when a disoriented Junior wanders off in search of his (deceased) brother, "Johnny Boy," forcing Tony, Janice, and Bobby into a day-long search that ends when he's finally returned home by the police. Then again at the end of "Members Only," when he confuses Tony's late-night presence in his home for his (also deceased) rival "Little Pussy" Malanganote  and shoots Tony in the stomach. Season 6 sees him ostracized by the family following this incident, dooming Junior to increasingly shabby state care and finally a Loss of Identity.
Scatterbrained Senior: Invoked after suffering a head injury after leaving court, where Junior and Tony conspire to make it appear he's mentally unfit to stand trial to avoid jail time due to dementia. It ends up played straight when Junior develops dementia for real, wandering through the streets in his pyjamas looking for his long-dead brother, shooting Tony after mistaking him for an also long-dead rival, and eventually forgetting who Tony even is and that he was ever part of a crime family.
Sir Swears-a-Lot: Everyone in the cast (save for Livia) is a potty mouth, but Junior swears more than all of them.
The Smart Guy: Despite his ineffectiveness as a leader and his senility in later seasons, he's far from stupid in the first four seasons, and as noted above, is an Excellent Judge of Character to pretty much everyone on the show who isn't a pretty woman. A more impulsive villain would've sided with Richie in Season 2, but Junior's intelligence allowed him to recognize that Richie wasn't respected at all when compared to Tony. He also recognizes that Christopher Moltisanti would be more of a detriment to the mob than an asset early on in Season 1, in spite of Tony's nepotism.
Speak Ill of the Dead: Shortly after Jackie Jr.'s death, Uncle Junior idly comments that the kid was always a "dumb fuck" who nearly drowned in a couple of inches of water once. Inappropriate, sure, but Corrado's appraisal was pretty accurate...
Starter Villain: Clashed with Tony for leadership of the family in Season One. Though he ordered and nearly succeeded in getting Tony whacked he remained reasonable and a far cry from the Ax-Crazy likes of Richie, Ralph, and Phil.
Tap on the Head: A news crew's boom mic hitting his head causes him to fall down the stairs outside the courthouse following one of his trials. It's later theorized this incident might've triggered his onset of dementia.
Thicker Than Water: Subverted when he backs Tony against Richie Aprile. He invokes Pragmatic Villainy as he's better off with his nephew, but then again he's still mad at Richie for suggesting a hit against him.
Token Good Teammate: Strangely, for a given value of good, he is this for Tony's parental figures (Johnny, Livia, Dickie Moltisanti, and himself), seemingly being the only one who genuinely cares for the well-being of Tony, and acts more like a normal parent to him than his actual parents or Dickie.
Trying Not to Cry: When Tony asks him if he loves him, Junior's mouth starts to quiver but no tears are shed.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: The Many Saints of Newark reveal that if not for Junior ordering Dickie to be whacked, Tony (his nephew) and Christopher (Dickie's son) would never have been fully entrapped by a life of crime and all the misery that happens to them and those around them would have never happened. Despite loving Tony, his actions ensure the young boy follows the life of a mobster, ultimately destroying him.
Wouldn't Hit a Girl: He almost hits his girlfriend Bobbi with a closed fist during their nasty break-up, but can't bring himself to do so, settling for punching the wall behind her instead, and smashing a pie in her face.