Amoral Attorney: The finale implies she's on her way to becoming one as she starts to favor law over a medical degree.
Armor-Piercing Question: She delivers one to AJ, who at that point was still ignorant of what Tony does for a living.
Do you know any other garbagemen who live in a house like this?
Believing Their Own Lies: She eventually grows more cynical and begins not only helping to uphold the blatantly false idea that her parents are upstanding citizens and accepting their dysfunctional behaviour as normal, but also actually believing it to some extent, as she abandons a potential medical career to become a white-collar criminal lawyer to defend persecuted minorities (read: Italian-American criminals) after watching her father being arrested by the FBI (for an accusation he is completely guilty of).
Big Fish in a Bigger Ocean: During her high school years, Meadow gets to live in material comfort thanks to Tony while being an honor roll student who plays a key role in several extra-curriculars. But once she gets to Columbia, she finds herself among students who either are superior to her intellectually or come from upper-class families that exert a greater deal of influence in the wider world outside of New Jersey. And much to Carmela's disappointment, Meadow's grades start to slip because the Ivy League academic environment is much more challenging than what it was in high school. All of this plays a part in Meadow retreating back into her mafia bubble, as she struggles to truly fit in with her peers.
Big Sister Instinct: Despite her flaws and constant bickering with him, she does love A.J. She comforts him in Season 1 when Tony gets shot, covers for him when he gets drunk, and tries to help him out of his depression in season 6.
Brainy Brunette: Unlike her dumbass brother AJ, Meadow is bright enough to be a pediatrician or a lawyer.
Bratty Teenage Daughter: Initially (especially in The Pilot), leading to several You Are Grounded! instances.
Calling the Old Man Out: Calls Tony out on his hypocrisy and line of work time and again; Tony "calls" her back, however.
Character Development: In the early seasons, she's shown as a smart, spoiled, party-goer, over-dramatic, in-denial, and in some ways, a troubled kid. In the later seasons, she would later learn the consequences and reality of life, money, education, politics, and relationships.
Conditioned to Accept Horror: As Meadow goes out into the wider world and interacts with people who did not grow up around the mafia, the effects of the upbringing on her psyche are made more apparent. It's most frequently seen during her relationship with Finn, where he repeatedly tries to convince her the violent behavior of Tony's associates that they witness is not normal, to no avail.
Cool Big Sis: Carmela is angry with her for covering up for A.J. getting a downtown hotel room and getting drunk with his friends; Tony responds, based on his own childhood, that that's what big sisters should do. Beyond that, she also tends to be the only member of the family in later seasons who doesn't treat AJ entirely like a lost cause, even pointing out to her parents that his struggles with depression could lead to him attempting suicide - something that she's sadly proven right in.
Corrupt the Cutie: She starts as a principled girl who has contempt for the Mafia, but she is gradually dragged into the masquerade. By the end, she is engaged to Patsy Parisi's son, and it is implied she will become another mob lawyer.
Daddy's Girl: Played straight at first before being defied, as Tony seems to grow more annoyed with her disapproval. Mostly played straight again towards the end of the series, when she gravitates back towards her father's way-of-life by going on a path towards becoming a mob lawyer and dating Patrick Parisi.
Daddy's Little Villain: Reconstructed. Carmela desperately wants to avert this trope, which is why she tries to force Meadow into medicine, and Meadow, for the most part, seems like the Only Sane Man who won't be dragged in. However, she is eventually corrupted through association with the mob and is well on her way to becoming an Amoral Attorney, to Carmela's disappointment and sadness.
Dating What Daddy Hates: Tony gets very angry when she dates a boy who is half African American and half Jewish. This is in large part why they end up breaking up. Her relationship with Jackie Jr. isn't much better, due to him being a Stupid Crook with her father attempting to set him straight. Tony is much more approving of her next boyfriend, but their mob lifestyle eventually scares him off.
Deadpan Snarker: Meadow is a bright young girl, and her "smart mouth" (lampshaded by Carmela) is every bit a match. She can keep up with the best of them on the show when the mood takes her, which is often.
Dramatically Missing the Point: Due to growing up under the sheltered parentage of a powerful mobster, she has a heavily skewed view of reality, which becomes increasingly prevalent as she grows to accept the criminal side of her family, including thinking that her family and friends are being persecuted merely for being Italian-American "minorities", rather than being, well, hardened criminals, and Italian-Americans not being considered a minority group in the present day. This is most obvious with her second boyfriend, Finn, who is from a civilian family also of Italian descent and is clearly disturbed by the level of casual violence, nepotism, and selfishness in her culture. Due to being raised around these people, being sheltered from most of it (due to being a respected captain's daughter), and not understanding how much of her lifestyle is solely due to criminal connections, she genuinely doesn't understand why Finn is so afraid of them and thinks it's because he just wants to break up with her.
Foolish Sibling, Responsible Sibling: The "responsible" to AJ's "foolish". Unlike her brother, Meadow is a model student who eventually attends Columbia. However, by the end of the series, this becomes somewhat blurred as she becomes engaged to Patsy Parisi's son and is well on her way to becoming a mob lawyer, while AJ is still relatively clean and has a hope of a legitimate future.
Foreshadowing: As early as the first season, she comments on how cool Sharon Stone looks in Casino, which is the kind of remark one would expect from Carmela.
Freudian Excuse: She applies it to a whole collective, reasoning that the poverty and dire conditions of the Italian Mezzogiorno breed crime. In-story, being born into the Mafia gradually catches up to her too.
Gone Horribly Right: After Meadow's rebellious behavior towards her family increases following Jackie Jr.'s death, Carmela has a stern talking to with her about upholding the masquerade so that the family will be at peace. However, the result is that Meadow not only upholds the facade, but she genuinely starts to believe that Tony and his ilk are unfairly persecuted by the government for being Italian-Americans. As a result, she decides to use her education to become a mob lawyer so she can "help" the community, much to Tony and Carmela's horror.
Guardian Angel: Meadow is one for Tony, inadvertently saving his life multiple times (blocking Febby Petrulio from getting a clear shot at Tony in "College", taking the lamp the FBI bugged in "Another Toothpick", calling out for him during his coma in "Mayham" which stops him from crossing over to the other side); she's even referred to as the Guardian Angel in the seven souls montage in season six.
Hidden Depths: Her facial expressions when she listens to AJ's unfocused rant during the series finale imply that despite having fully bought into the mafia's lies and propaganda, she still understands and empathizes with AJ's struggles with cognitive dissonance.
Hollywood Genetics: Meadow is noticeably darker than anyone else in her family due to Jamie-Lynn Sigler being of Cuban and Sephardic Jewish descent rather than Italian. In the show, Carmela recalls her mother lamenting how dark Meadow's skin was as a baby.
Hypocrite: Like father, like mother, like daughter, but a subtler example.
Meadow presents herself as an open-minded liberal, having gone to an Ivy League school, becoming engaged with political and anti-racist discourse, and having a more critical, modern attitude towards her Italian-American heritage. However, when it comes down to it, she doesn't blink at adopting the mafia byline in 5x09, "Unidentified Black Males," that "African-Americans" killed Jackie Aprile Jr. when defending the wiseguys from Finn's accusations of violence. She also, surprisingly easily, turns a blind eye to her family's homophobia when Vito is outed, also to Finn's dismay, and doesn't show any concern about what such revelations will mean for him.
As a teenager, she's quick to call out Tony and Carmela when they make racist remarks. However, she's no better than they are, as she privately accuses a bi-racial classmate of only being accepted to Wesleyan because of affirmative action and is implied to only be interested in the similarly bi-racial Noah Tannenbaum because it gets a rise out of Tony.
Prides herself on her adulthood and independence, but is completely financially dependent on her family. Carmela calls her out on this, and Meadow has no real defense.
As Tony points out during a conversation with Artie, Meadow made a big show of wanting to be an independent adult and go to a far away college like Berkeley in California, only to wind up attending nearby Columbia where she still comes home almost every weekend so Carmela can do her laundry and cook for her.
Reaches its apex in Season 6 when she accepts a job as a lawyer specializing in white-collar crimes. She is fully aware that her father is complicit in financial crimes (and has been as early as Season 1, in 1x05, "College").
I Am Not My Father: Gradually subverted. Although she opposes her dad's criminal lifestyle at first, she eventually accepts it, refers to civilians as "outsiders", defends him against (true and accurate) accusations of him being a violent gangster, and is on her way to becoming a mob lawyer by the end of the series. Tony confesses in therapy that he is rather dismayed that she is following in his footsteps, because he wanted otherwise for his children.
Ignorant of Their Own Ignorance: She ends up being completely and utterly clueless just how brutishly violent and repulsive her father and his compatriots really are, believing them to be unfairly persecuted for being scapegoat "minorities", rather than being totally guilty of everything they're accused of and more. This is because Tony continuously gaslighting his family and leaving them in the dark about what he actually does for a living (and the few times he does admit to something, he heavily downplays how bad it is), plus the fact Meadow is the boss' daughter, so Tony's underlings treat her well in hopes of currying favour with Tony (something she's blind to), leaves her with a permanently skewed and idealistic perspective of the mob that she is oblivious to, even when faced with overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
Insufferable Genius: To Meadow's credit, she's quite smart for her age. Unfortunately, by the end of the series, she's decided to use her intellect for evil by helping the mob, making her a more active participant in their amoral behavior than Carmela.
Ivy League for Everyone: Columbia; she's unaware this was somehow invoked by her mother.
Lack of Empathy: She shows no concerns about the fact she effectively gave Vito a death sentence by outing him to Carmela and Tony.
Like Father, Like Son: Meadow becomes just like her mother Carmela by the end of the series, hypocritical and willfully ignorant of the Mafia's violence and degeneracy. She has also developed something akin to her mother's calm social grace in family gatherings. For example, there is a scene earlier in the series when Tony comments how she has 'become a robot' as she is greeting the guests at a gathering at the Soprano home.
Love Makes You Dumb: Meadow is generally a very bright girl who's wary of her father's criminal associates. However, her infatuation with Jackie Aprile Jr. completely blinds her to the fact that he too is an aspiring mobster, Smug Snake, and an all-around Jerkass with a sick sense of entitlement. Even after she catches Jackie cheating on her, Meadow continues to pine for him.
Love Makes You Evil: Furthermore, Jackie's death and Meadow's devastation over his passing essentially serve as her Start of Darkness, which sees her beginning to fully immerse herself into her family's mob lifestyle.
Loving a Shadow: Her infatuation with Jackie Aprile Jr. primarily stems from the fact he also grew up in a mob family and is one of the few people she knows who can relate to her on the subject. This blinds her her to the rest of his obvious character flaws even after she catches him cheating on her.
Caitlin: He was cute. But he was really boring.
Meadow: (sobbing) You don't know what it's like to grow up where we did.
Abidjan: Whatever, Med. He was such a drip.
Meadow: No, he wasn't! He was great!
Mafia Princess: Although she starts off disliking her father's lifestyle, she gradually begins to accept it, defends Tony from other people's accusations, and eventually considers herself a mob "insider" who is going to become an Amoral Attorney and marry one of Tony's soldier's sons.
Mouthy Kid: Is often mouthing off in the earlier seasons, even when she's caught having a debauched party at her grandmother's empty house.
Never My Fault: Tony remarks that if he had a quarter for every time she's said something wasn't her fault, he'd be able to own a private jet on 24-hour stand-by.
Non-Idle Rich: Has a job as a social worker for the poor.
Not So Above It All: Starts off naive and rebellious but later relents and accepts her father's criminal activities, even going so far as to defend him against strangers. By the finale, she's implied to be on her way to embracing the mob lifestyle entirely.
Playing the Victim Card: Like many other members of her family, she has a huge victim complex and hardly ever takes responsibility her actions, recognizes when she is in the wrong in a situation, and makes other people's problems all about herself.
Soapbox Sadie: Once she starts college. She feuds with Tony over her black/Jewish boyfriend and complains about the government's treatment of refugees from Afghanistan.
Spanner in the Works: She accidentally sabotages the FBI's attempt to wiretap Tony's basement by taking the bugged lamp the agents were using to listen in to Tony's conversations to her college dorm. A moment of later Dramatic Irony has Tony getting pissed that she took the lamp to school when he had wanted to use it.
Spoiled Brat: She trashed her grandmother's house and her only punishment was having her credit card taken away. Though this ends up being Subverted after she overhead Janice angrily confronting her parents over it and ends up cleaning the house without her parents telling her to do so.
Start of Darkness: In the first few seasons, she is much more free-spirited, rebellious, and openly opposed to Tony's line of work, but gradually becomes more accepting of his lifestyle and taking his obviously false cover stories at face value, defending him from accusations of criminality and even getting upset at a friend discussing their affairs with "outsiders", primarily after the death of her ex-boyfriend, Jackie Jr.. By the end of the series, she's engaged to the son of one of Tony's soldiers and on the way to becoming a mob lawyer, much to Tony and Carmela's distress.
Tragic Villain: Meadow is smart, alert, motivated, hardworking, and courageous, which leads to her ending up going to a bona fide Ivy League college, one of the very best outcomes for a Mafioso child. But these qualities also let her see how feeble and hypocritical the Mafia lifestyle makes her parents, and her stories are more often than not about how seeing it makes her less and less happy, to the point that she starts going along with their lies just to avoid thinking about it. By series' end, she's fully bought into the language they use, locked into the same set of excuses as the previous generation.
The Ugly Guy's Hot Daughter: Let's be perfectly honest: Meadow's pretty good-looking, while her dad? Not so much. Lampshaded; when Janice mentions Tony's "good-looking kids", Tony jokes, "even with our genes."
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: Vito was already taking heat for his alleged homosexuality, but it was still in the realm of hearsay (the mobster who levied the charge was considered an untrustworthy "Irish drunk" by Tony) until Meadow admitted to her parents that Finn saw him going down on a guy; Tony has Finn recount his story to his capos, and Vito is marked for death.
White Sheep: Gradually subverted, as being born into a Mafia family catches up to her, ultimately influencing her decision to become a defense attorney for the mob.
You Are What You Hate: During most of the series, Meadow rebels against her father and his lifestyle. But by the end of the series, she ends up defending her father's lifestyle, chastises other mob kids for speaking frankly in front of "outsiders", and even embraces the role of crime family wife, getting engaged to a Mafia family attorney.
You Could Have Used Your Powers for Good!: Meadow is given every possible advantage she could get to live an honest life and free the Soprano family from their criminal lineage. Instead, she chooses to become a mob lawyer and ensures that the family will remain involved for another generation, much to Tony and Carmela's disappointment.