Affably Evil: Paulie is often cracking jokes and usually has an upbeat, chipper personality, but he's quick to switch to threats and murderous rage.
Ax-Crazy: Paulie is highly impulsive and homicidal. "Pine Barrens" famously sees his inability to let go of what was an extremely minor slight set up the whole episode's central conflict. As a result, what was just a simple job of picking up a loan payment escalates to attempted murder and finally to him and Chris getting hopelessly lost in the woods where they almost get killed by exposure (while almost killing each other too). And just check out some of his psychotic facial expressions.
Bad People Abuse Animals: Downplayed. He isn't a big fan of the cat who shows up in Satriale's at the end of the series but he doesn't do anything awful to him beyond shooing him out of the room.
Bait the Dog: He stands up for Vito initially, calling the rumors malicious slander and refusing to believe it without actual proof. But when the truth comes out after Finn's testimony, he's out for blood like no one else, second only to Carlo, and questioning Tony's leadership in the process.
Bastard Bastard: Paulie's a lifelong criminal and eventually learns learns that his aunt is his biological mother, who had a brief affair with a soldier in her youth and gave Paulie to her sister to raise. He's very upset to learn this.
Beware the Silly Ones: Despite being childish, superstitious, and absurdly hilarious, he's still a brutal, murderous mobster who has managed to survive decades in the job. And by the series finale, he's one of the few left standing.
Character Filibuster: Usually goes on long-winded diatribes about whatever's on his mind, sometimes with no bearing to the topic at hand.
Beansie: One time, I fell asleep while he was on the phone. I wake up 20 minutes later and he was still going.
Character Tics: He always has his hands in front of him. Tony Sirico explained this as a prison-like primal stance that allows you to be always ready for a fight.
Whenever he's wagging his finger or pointing at someone, he almost always uses his pinkie in addition to his index finger, as if he's trying to ward off the "evil eye" (or malocchio). Considering how superstitious he is, it makes perfect sense.
Cloudcuckoolander: There's no telling what really goes on inside Paulie's head. He's extremely superstitious, multi-phobic (mainly mysophobic), and tends to believe in paranormal things.
Commuting on a Bus: He was incarcerated during the first half of season 4, as the actor needed some time off for back surgery.
Cool Uncle: He can be seen joking with the younger crowd all the way to the finale.
Cultural Posturing: Laments that the "medigan" (a corruption of "Americani" which refers to White, non-Italian-Americans in general) have taken over traditional Italian things such as the cappuccino, pizza, calzone, buffalo mozzarella, and olive oil. This is turned on its head when he visits Italy and finds himself treated as a boorish American by native Italians.
Dark Horse Victory: Throughout the series there's been a continuous succession squabble among the capos and underbosses over who succeeds Tony in the event of his retirement/arrest/death (particularly during the period when Tony was in a coma). Paulie manages to win by default, despite not really wanting said role, simply because he's the only senior member of Tony's inner circle still alive and active by the end of the series, with Silvio being comatose (especially because an earlier episode had Tony outright consider murdering Paulie just for being annoying).
Day in the Limelight: The episode "Remember When" dedicates some spotlight on him since he is the only member that goes into hiding with Tony. It almost becomes Paulie's death episode, but Tony ultimately decides to spare him.
Deadpan Snarker: Never short a witty put-down or snappy comeback.
Death Glare: A past master at these; just look at his page image above. Never more severe than when he and the others confronted Pussy about turning informant to the feds.
Don't Explain the Joke: He has the bad habit of explaining his jokes or repeating the exact same joke to someone who just heard him tell it to someone else.
Driven by Envy: Paulie is immediately wary of anybody receiving praise, rewards or mere attention from Tony, and quickly becomes hostile to and establishes competing feuds with almost any mid-to-senior-level member rejoining the Jersey crew, like Ralph and Feech. Tony exploits this in their final scene, where Paulie keeps refusing the job of captain of the Aprile crew until Tony finally mentions he would give it to Patsy instead.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: His relationship with his mother is one of his few redeeming features. When he discovers that Nucci isn't his biological mother, but rather his aunt, he doesn't take it well and temporarily disowns her, mostly due to being angry that she lied to him for his whole life about his origins. Eventually, though, he comes around to decide that it doesn't matter because Nucci was still the person who raised him and was always there to offer him support when he needed it, and so he ends up forgiving and reconciling with her.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
He is deeply saddened by the passing of his "aunt" Dottie.
Paulie will occasionally show Papa Bear tendencies towards his nephew, Little Paulie.
Even Evil Has Standards: Even a vindictive Jerkass like Paulie has his limits when it comes to his fellow mobsters' villainy.
Paulie is upset by the sight of Furio attacking a child.
He is appalled by Tony's gleeful attitude regarding Phil's heart attack.
He's outraged when Chris badmouths his own mother at his intervention and physically assaults him.
Like with Tony and Sil, he's disgusted after Richie Aprile ran over Beansie and crippled him.
Even he seems shocked when Tony begins to beat Georgie after he says 'you gotta live for today' and helps get Tony off of Georgie.
He genuinely despises Ralph and was shocked and disgusted by his brutal murder of Tracee, especially after learning that she was pregnant with his child.
Evil Is Petty: While he and Big Pussy are on a mission for Tony (investigating the carjacking of one of AJ's teachers), they ask around at a Starbucks expy. Paulie is appalled at the "appropriation of the Italian culture", (as Italians invented cappuccino), and opts to shoplift several cups and mugs to make up for it. The whole reason why he and Chris get lost in the woods for several hours and almost freeze to death in "Pine Barrens" is that he couldn't just let go of a minor slight and felt he had to escalate the situation all the way up to attempted murder. Said slight is only even given because Paulie walks into the guy's home and proceeds to act like an entitled prick who owns the place.
Faux Affably Evil: Jokes around with his victims, even before he's about to threaten, harm, or outright murder them.
Friend to All Children: Despite never being a father, Paulie has a soft spot for kids, comforting his mistress' young children after accidentally waking them up and getting along well with other mobsters' families. It's also shown that hurting kids is one of the few things he draws the line at and is disgusted when he sees others do so.
Gossipy Hen: He has a tendency to share secrets and rumors to people he views as trusted or unimportant, and is implied to have started the rumor that Adriana was blowing Tony before he crashed the car in "Irregular Around The Margins". This habit puts him in hot water as Tony considers whacking him over his many indiscretions in "Remember When".
Guilt-Induced Nightmare: Paulie does a lot of terrible things and he sometimes has nightmares about them.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Which Christopher manages to set off half the time.
Half-Breed Discrimination: After learning that his actual mother was knocked up by an unidentified sailor, Paulie realizes that in all likelihood he is not fully Italian. It doesn't sit well.
The Heavy: On multiple occasions, due to Paulie's combination of a big mouth and poor common sense about where and when he opens it. For example, he causes a major spat between Tony and Christopher over Adriana's injuries in a car accident, as he mishears "blow to [Adriana's] head" as "Adriana blowing Tony".
Heroic Comedic Sociopath: Zig-Zagged. In the first half of the series, this trope is played straight with regards to his character due to the fact that most of his victims are either criminals like himself or otherwise incredibly obnoxious and cruel. However, while his odd quirks continue to be a source of humor, this trope is gradually subverted as his crimes become increasingly heinous in later episodes.
Hidden Depths: He's really good at sports betting, with several bookies describing him as The Ace. Apparently, he knows how to thoroughly research the teams, players, and every other possible angle to make the best bets.
Hypocrite: Like many of the mobsters, Paulie is rarely one to practice what he preaches:
During Christopher and Eugene's promotion ceremony, he tells them that if they ever have a problem with anyone in or outside of the family, they should take it to Tony. Thereafter, anytime anyone, particularly Christopher, has a problem with Paulie and tells Tony, Paulie becomes outraged that they went to him.
When Little Paulie tells him about Ralph's fat joke about Ginny Sack, Paulie scolds him for repeating it and tells Johnny what Ralph said. Paulie himself was the one who told the other mobsters "Ginny Sack is so fat she needs her own zip code" the previous year.
He resents guys like Richie Aprile and Feech LaManna who expect special treatment and favors for doing time in prison and even tells Feech "in my book, you get points for staying out of the can." Paulie himself expects such treatment during his brief prison stint in Season 4.
When the Gualtieri and Aprile crews collaborate on a heist, the former provides the codes but the latter pulls the job off; Paulie demands a sit-down in a bid to wrest a good chunk of the spoils from Ralph, who feels the greater effort entitles him to the greater reward (in fairness some of Paulie's guys were supposed to be part of the actual heist as well but Ralph opted not to bring them so his crew could do all the work). When the same crews (with certain changes in personnel) collaborate on another heist, it's Paulie who works off Vito's information; naturally, he attempts to hoard as much of the take as he can, and makes the very argument he challenged previously.
Hypocritical Humor: Much of the humor built around Paulie is that he's always protesting or criticizing something that applies to himself.
They released these fucks from the can. Obviously, he wasn’t rehabilitated.
I Am Not Your Father: He learns from a deathbed confession from his supposed aunt, Dottie, that she is his biological mother. Nucci is really his aunt.
Idiot Ball: Actually believes Johnny Sack that Carmine Sr. frequently asks about and has plans for him.
Informed Ability: When he gives Chris the reins over his gambling racket, the bookies inform Chris that Paulie is The Ace at sports betting, as he researches the sports teams, their players, and every other possible angle before placing successful bets. We never really see Paulie applying or displaying this kind of meticulousness, in gambling or in any other discipline.
In-Series Nickname: "Paulie Walnuts", though most of his friends simply call him Paulie instead.
It's All About Me: Paulie rarely misses the chance to steer a topic towards how it affects him.
[re: Vito] How much more betrayal can I take?
I Was Quite a Looker: Implied in the series proper when Tony Soprano shows him an old photograph (which was of the real Tony Sirico), the prequel film confirms that Paulie was a handsome guy when he was younger.
Jerkass: He's petty, stubborn, vindictive, hot-headed, and self-centered.
Jerkass Has a Point:
He comments on everything and anything, and half the time he's not half-wrong, even if not for the right reasons. Notably, he distrusts anybody who makes waves, mostly because they steal Paulie's thunder. He outlives them all.
He never married because he believes that marriage and having a family does not jive well with the risks and responsibilities of being a mobster. Given all the headaches the mobsters who have spouses and kids have to deal with as a result of their way of life, particularly in Tony's, Christopher's, and Pussy's cases, he has a point.
He's right that Ralph's son being hurt doesn't automatically make his past behaviour okay and is justified in his anger for Ralph's cruelty towards his mother since she never did anything to the guy.
Karma Houdini:
Paulie never really gets any kind of comeuppance for his crimes, and at the end of the series pretty much everything is looking up for him (his superstitious misgivings about having been promoted by Tony to the head of a crew he fears is cursed aside). Especially when you consider how many of his mob friends have been killed or jailed, or have suffered other terrible fates.
Even within the family, Paulie never suffers for being the one who kicked off the tensions with New York by telling Johnny Sack about the joke Ralph Cifaretto made about his wife's weight. Even when Tony realizes it was most likely him, he can't prove it or get Paulie to confess, so he has no choice but to leave him be.
Kick the Dog: Several.
Murders Minnie Matrone after being caught robbing her (depending on the viewer though, this might feel deserved).
When Chris complains to Tony about having to pay for Paulie's dinner tab, Paulie retaliates by inflating the bill the next night.
After Chris throws a brick at a waiter for complaining about his lack of tips, the man suffers a seizure, and Paulie murders him instead of getting him help so that he and Chris will avoid implication.
Paulie is a complete dick to Valery, simply because he's in a bad mood for having to do Silvio's collections. It leads to a lot of trouble.
He beats and extorts a completely innocent business associate for no other reason than the guy has a loving birth mother and he doesn't.
While trying to organize an intervention for Christopher, Paulie has no sympathy for the mediator, Dominic Palladino, who had been in rehab twice before and is quick to judge his failings as an addict.
"Great, so he's taking advice from a two-time loser!"
He mocks Chris's joy over his newborn daughter. Paulie mocks Chris saying the girl will end up an idiot stripper at the Bada Bing!
Laughably Evil: A ridiculously rapacious and cheap bastard. Comically absurd like many of his shenanigans.
Lonely at the Top: Heavily implied in the last episode with Paulie's final scene. He reluctantly accepts his promotion as Tony's successor, due to Tony not-so subtly threatening to give it to Patsy instead (who Paulie hates), and is shown relaxing in the sun in front of Satriale's afterwards, as he had done for most of the show. However, now he's the only one left. All of his former friends are dead or otherwise taken out, which is the only reason Tony even considering making Paulie his successor.
Loss of Identity: After his mom is revealed to be his aunt (and vice versa), Paulie goes through this process. He eventually comes to terms with it.
Malaproper: Like virtually every other mobster in the series, he's not as smart as he thinks he is.
Manchild: Paulie is an immature, vindictive bully who seeks attention and validation from figures of authority and is very prone to jealousy, envy, and mood changes.
Married to the Job:
Literally; he doesn't have much of a private life outside of being a gangster. Although he is shown to be dating a couple of different women throughout the series, Paulie has no children and doesn't appear to be interested in maintaining any kind of steady relationship, mostly remaining single.
A later episode has Tony and Silvio extolling the virtues of married life to Christopher, who is hesitant at the prospect of marrying his longtime fiance Adriana because he only recently discovered that she may be infertile. Silvio admonishes Chris, asking him if he wants to end up like (Uncle) Junior, "or worse, Paulie?"
Paulie: No offense, but ask me, marriage and our thing don't jive.
The Mentor: For Christopher, unwillingly so, but they start to develop an actual friendship.
Middle Name Basis: Paul is actually his middle name, his first name is Peter.
The Mole: Feeds Johnny Sack information for a while until he realizes that Johnny is just stringing him along. Years later, Tony gets suspicious and contemplates killing him for it, but Paulie is wise enough to deny it.
Neighbourhood-Friendly Gangsters: Subverted. Paulie is appointed manager of an amusement fair. He is such a cheapskate that he cuts corners and budgets to the point one ride becomes hazardous and an accident ensues.
Never My Fault: He acts appalled whenever someone who's not Tony calls him out or rightfully retaliates against him for screwing them over, Christopher especially. Most notably, he seems borderline blind to any culpability he had (which was all of it) in screwing up the Russian deal in "Pine Barrens" out of sheer pettiness towards Valery. His attitude is summed up best when Silvio relays this quote to Tony after the failed hit on Phil Leotardo in Season 6:
Silvio: Paulie said he wants it known, it's on him, he takes full responsibility… but that he didn't do nothing.
Subverted upon Christopher's death. It probably says a lot that Paulie would outright admit that he was too much of a dick to him in the end.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Despite his apparent lack of intelligence and overall asinine behavior, he is pretty cunning and genuinely Street Smart when it comes to how the Mafia works, and he knows how to stay alive within it while not overplaying it like with many other aspects. He tells Silvio he "survived the 70s by the skin of his nuts" and in the final episode, he's essentially the last man standing in the DiMeo family.
Examples of his cunning include him being one of the only people who actively despise Richie, Ralph, Vito, Feech, and Chris, all of whom he foresees (correctly) as major troublemakers, and his refusal in "Remember When" to admit to Tony that he told Johnny Sack the Ralph Cifaretto weight joke saves his life, unbeknownst to himself. This instinct is in full effect, even though 6 years have passed and both Johnny Sack and Ralph are dead.
Oblivious Adoption: It it turns out that Nucci isn't his biologial mother, but his aunt. It turns out that the woman he thought was his aunt was actually his mother, when she confesses the truth to him on her deathbed, along with telling him that he is the product of a short fling once she had with a soldier and she never really knew his father, except for the fact that he was named Russ and probably wasn't of Italian ancestry. Paulie is shaken to his core by the revelation and angrily disowns Nucci for keeping the truth from him for all his life. Eventually, he comes to realize that even if Nucci is not his birth mother, she was still the woman who raised him, and he ends up forgiving her.
Obliviously Evil: Paulie's understanding of morality is very stunted. Tony, Christopher, Silvio, and several of the other mobsters seem to understand the immorality of their chosen 'profession' on some level, but Paulie seems to sincerely think he is a standup guy.
Old Soldier: At the start of the series, he is pushing 60 and is a capable soldier and enforcer, regularly engaging in street work. He still does it from time to time after he is promoted. For example, by the Season 6 episode "Mayham", in his late 60s, he helps clear a room of some Colombian drug dealers, several of whom are young enough to be his children or grandchildren.
Only Known by Their Nickname: A variant; his full nickname is "Paulie Walnuts" but is universally referred to as "Paulie". Moreover, Paul is his middle name and people only call him Peter in official capacities like hospitals.
Papa Wolf: With the use of his car and in the presence of Kelli, he left her and Christopher's garden in ruins after his nephew, Little Paulie, was beaten by the latter and thrown out of a second-story window.
Parting-Words Regret: After Christopher dies, he bitterly regrets having shaken him down for money and for making fun of his sobriety.
Perverted Sniffing: In the third season episode entitled "Second Opinion", newly made man Christopher Moltisanti receives a surprise, late night visit (inspection) at his apartment from Paulie and Patsy Parisi. They comb through Chris and his girlfriend Adriana's belongings to cherry-pick Christopher's stolen swag. Chris eyes Paulie taking a mighty sniff of a pair of panties from Adriana (Christopher's fiancee)'s lingerie drawer. When Tony scolds Paulie for this, he's not even ashamed, and when pressed to apologize to Christopher, he refuses, merely offering "as of their wedding, anything that touches her pussy is off limits". Tony for his part seems satisfied with this.
The Peter Principle: Paulie is highly competent at any task involving violence or intimidation, which in addition to seniority gets him promoted to roles that require at least a modicum of tact and subtlety, which Paulie typically lacks. Without close supervision, he's a disaster and a constant source of trouble for others.
Pet the Dog: While he's rarely nice or polite being a massive Jerkass, he has demonstrated a capacity to empathize with those around him:
His relationship with his mother. Deconstructed in that it leads to more crime in order to provide for her.
A straightforward example in From Where To Eternity, which shows him comforting his goomah's children after they are awakened by his night terror.
Shows some genuine concern for Beansie Gaeta after his run-in with Richie Aprile, with whom Paulie is none too happy. This is despite Beansie being a civilian as well.
After Finn tells the mobsters about him witnessing Vito giving a man a blowjob, Paulie assures Finn that they will make sure he faces no retribution from Vito.
Upon discovering that Nucci is not his mother, he first reacts by disowning her. However, over time, he gradually finds it within his heart to forgive her and make amends with her before she dies. This is clearly demonstrated by his visible grief over her death during the course of her funeral.
Moreover, he is also seen grieving (albeit restrainedly) over the death of Christopher Moltisanti and even expressing regret over his cruelty towards him during the course of their time together.
Politically Incorrect Villain: Tends to make vulgar, sexist, xenophobic, racist, or (often and) homophobic comments.
Professional Butt-Kisser: A servile brown-noser who shows his real "allegiance" the minute Tony gets indisposed.
I live but to serve you, my liege.
Properly Paranoid: He keeps his guard up and is wary of almost everything and everybody. While he has a very mixed success record, is not right all the time about troublemakers, and his zeal is often misguided and wrapped with envy, this explains why he outlives every other guy who is apparently more intelligent than him.
Psychopathic Manchild: He's a mama's boy, and he has not one iota of concern for human life.
Rank Up: From enforcer to underboss over the course of the series.
Right for the Wrong Reasons: Paulie antagonizes anybody who is favored by Tony or has some sudden prominence and is quick to badmouth and distrust them, not because they are bad assets but out of jealousy for being overshadowed. He's right in that they are not good enough to be around. Paulie survives the events while most others end up dead.
Saying Too Much: During his 'friendship' with Johnny Sack, he conveys information that Johnny uses to the business advantage of New York.
The Scrooge: Despite his high and pretty well-paid position in the mob hierarchy, Paulie constantly skimps and cuts corners wherever he possibly can, to the point of clipping discount coupons, and gets extremely upset and whiny whenever faced with even the pettiest of unexpected expenditures.
Silver Fox: Despite being one of the older enforcers in Tony’s crew, he is in excellent shape for his age, owing to his strong personal discipline. Unlike the others, he has a decent diet and keeps himself active. It helps that, in his youth, he genuinely was a handsome guy.
The Sociopath: Played for Laughs in the first half of the series, but then played straight in later seasons. Partially Subverted by the fact that he has shown empathy towards certain people, especially his adoptive mother.
Sole Survivor: The only high-ranking member of the DiMeo family that's still a mobster and not in a precarious position. The rest are either dead, imprisoned, turned informant, disabled, AWOL, or in some form of Uncertain Doom.
Sophisticated as Hell: He tries hard to emulate Tony's Wicked Cultured nature, but fails, hard.
Straight Edge Evil: Downplayed. While Paulie does enjoy a bit of drinking, gambling, and whoring, his vices are remarkably restrained compared to Tony, Christopher, and Silvio, who waste most of their money on their hedonistic lifestyles. Tony notes that Paulie is still quite fit into his old age while Tony himself becomes a degenerate gambler, whoremonger, and Fat Bastard. It's implied that Paulie spends a significant chunk of his income on provisions for his mother instead. It also keeps his mind sharp and no doubt contributed to his longevity.
Talkative Loon: The man is always, always talking, telling stories and ideas with varying degrees of triviality and annoyance, which often becomes grating to others.
That Came Out Wrong: In the sixth season, he calls "Beansie" Gaeta, who is in a wheelchair, a "stand-up guy" before hastily apologizing.
Turncoat: Tries to defect to New York, but his scheme ends in an Epic Fail when he discovers that Carmine Sr. doesn't even know him. Paulie was just being cajoled and exploited by Johnny Sack.
Undying Loyalty: Zigzagged. Paulie goes through periods in which he talks behind Tony's back, but later on in the series he is very loyal to Tony, if only for reasons of self-interest. It's Played Straight in that Paulie is completely loyal to the mafia lifestyle as a whole as, while he'll consider switching family allegiance, he considers the idea of leaving it or working with the Feds unconscionable note 
Unexpected Successor: If one goes with the interpretation that Tony is whacked at the end, then Paulie, as underboss, will succeed him as boss of the DiMeo family. Even if Tony survived, Paulie's role in the final two episodes where he essentially serves as Tony's second-in-command following the attacks on Silvio and Bobby is something Tony likely hadn't seen coming, especially given how tempted he was to murder Paulie earlier that season in "Remember When".
Verbal Tic: His "Heh-Heh-Heh" laugh. Lampshaded at one point when Tony wonders if he has Tourette's.
Villain Protagonist: At his heart. He appears to be a grandpa type, and he's really funny... but he still executes Pussy in cold blood (in tandem with Tony and Silvio), and unlike his compatriots, showed (almost) remorse over it or any of his other crimes.
Villain with Good Publicity: Amusingly, Paulie is a 2006 Honoree for Excellence in Recycling◊.
Villainous BSoD: When he discovers that Carmine Lupertazzi has barely any idea of who he is or the information he has provided his family, Paulie is completely stunned.
Villainous Friendship: A flimsy one with Tony, Paulie was more like a mentor back in the day, and a friend of Tony's father.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Christopher. The two of them frequently butt heads over the series, but when the chips are down they make a formidable team. After Christopher dies, Paulie is genuinely saddened by his death and regrets his behavior towards him.
We Used to Be Friends: Paulie has two downplayed examples where he started out a lot chummier with certain people until things got in the way.
Paulie was one of Tony's many mentors in the mob life and their relationship in the first couple seasons reflects this many times. Tony officially becoming The Don means he has to start making decisions with a more neutral view, which leads to him ruling against Paulie (or not as much as Paulie would like) frequently. Meanwhile, Paulie's Professional Butt-Kisser behavior, childlike personality, and inability to shut up starts to grate and annoy Tony more and more, to the point where just his voice and laugh starts to make Tony angry just from sheer annoyance. The former leads Paulie to start schmoozing with New York, which Tony figures out and leads to even more resentment. By the end, there's little actual warmth left.
Paulie and Christopher often did jobs together and, similar to his relationship to Tony, Paulie often acted as partly a mentor figure to Christopher. This works fine until Christopher becomes a made man and officially becomes a part of Paulie's crew. Paulie begins to resent Christopher's fast rise over his shown competence and starts antagonizing Christopher (besides his usual tendency to needlessly escalate situations) to put him in his place and Christopher chafes under the complete lack of respect and dignity that Paulie shows him. They usually make up eventually but their last shown interaction is a fight from Paulie mocking Christopher over his alcoholism, something Paulie regrets when Christopher dies, but still resents him for his funeral overshadowing his mother's.
Would Harm a Senior: Smothers elderly Minnie Matrone to death after she catches him trying to rob her.