Affably Evil: Despite being a ruthless mobster, he is a good person to hang out with. This, alongside with his level-headedness and ability to rein in Tony, makes him the most widely respected of all the members of Tony's inner-circle by the family's members and associates. When he's taken out by the Lupertazzis, all of the men take time to visit him at the hospital even with the war going on and become openly resentful towards Tony when it appears he's not doing the same.
Ambiguous Situation: What role did Silvio play in Tony's unofficial crew in the '80s? Ralph described Silvio as his, Tony, and Jackie's contemporary, implying he's an upstart just like them. However, The Many Saints of Newark depicts Silvio as having been an established soldier of the DiMeo Crime Family since the '60s, raising questions about what a senior Mafia member would be doing with what would be seen as bunch of two-bit thugs.
Bait the Dog: In many other works, one might think Silvio's hatred of a pedophile coach, his adoring love of his daughter whom he lavishly calls "The Principessa" and his levelheaded sense of honor would lead to a Noble Demon with standards who protects women. Silvio is an abusive, misogynist pimp who uses the girls at the Bada Bing as terrorized prostitutes to bring in income with the pretense of owing him money. He sees no contradiction between any of this.
Berserk Button:
Gambling - specifically, when Lady Luck turns against him.
It would be fair to say that almost anyone in the crime family would be outraged by one of their own becoming The Mole for the FBI, and wouldn't hesitate to execute the traitor. But Silvio stands out in this regard. He personally participates in the execution of at least three FBI informants, Jimmy Altieri, Big Pussy and Adriana. And each time his facial expression and lowered voice conveys intense fury over what he considers the worst kind of betrayal there is.
Beware the Nice Ones: Silvio can be pretty goofy with his Pacino impersonations and is one of the more level-headed mobsters, but he still won't hesitate to pimp slap one of his strippers and carry out gruesome murders. Just ask Adriana. In fact, most of the hits against rats (and suspected rats) are carried out by Silvio. In "The Blue Comet", Burt Gervasi contacts Silvio and lets him know that he's been playing both sides of the New Jersey-New York conflict and has switched sides to join the Lupertazzi family (with the intention of getting Sil to join him). Silvio calmly agrees to meet him before brutally strangling Burt to death in his own home and updating Tony about it later.
Tony: He thought you'd be a part of it?
Silvio: And he got an answer.
Blue Oni: To Tony's red moments, but Silvio also shows his temper occasionally.
The Chains of Commanding: He can't bear them during a brief stint at the helm.
Cold Ham: His relative restraint, gravitas and overall rigidness in body language make for a peculiar mix from a non-actor like Steve Van Zandt, "overacting by omission".
The Consigliere: His official role in the crime family; he's Tony's right-hand man and his primary confidant. He generally agrees with Tony's decision-making and sees to it that his orders are carried out, but he's not afraid to argue a contrary position or ask a hard question Tony would rather avoid. Of course, like an actual consigliere, he does not question Tony's decisions in public.
The Creon: Has reached the top levels of his ambition, and is severely stressed out by the possibility he might have to take over for Tony.
Cultural Posturing: His Italian heritage is Serious Business for him, and the usually loyal Sil collides with Tony over it. It leads to him leading a furious crusade against the Native protesters against Columbus Day as he is convinced it's a secret attack on a day of Italian pride.
Deadpan Snarker: Can even snark off to Tony and get away with it.
[re Vito, who was just outed as homosexual] Silvio: Let me just ask you, Ton'. Sake of argument. Let's say he shows up: You gonna kiss this guy on both cheeks?
Dismotivation: Silvio has never particularly wanted to be in charge of the family. His goal has always been to be able to enjoy a life of comfort and live to have grandkids. When he's forced in the role of boss in "Mayham", he realizes he's not suited for it and made the right decision.
Dodgy Toupee: The Many Saints of Newark reveals that he's been wearing one since the 70's. Before the Time Skip he's prematurely bald and the toupee only gets messed up during the interrogation of Harold's cousin.
The Dragon: Tony's unfilinchly loyal right-hand man and closest advisor, Sil is the only man in the DiMeo Crime Family that Tony can completely trust. Barese points out in a discussion about Tony possibly killing a made man over a horse that Silvio, the consigliere, should be the first in line to kill a boss for breaking the code yet Silvio refuses to pry on the matter.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: He cares deeply for his daughter and genuinely loves his wife despite being an adulterer.
Even Evil Has Standards:
He doesn't tolerate pedophiles. Sil is elated when Tony tells him to personally deal with Coach Hauser and is visibly pissed when Tony later calls it off.
While he personally murders many rats and traitors, he finds calling a bomb scare at their wake over the top as far as disrespect goes.
"No Show" demonstrates that even he has his limits with Tony's nepotism towards Christopher, as he feels Christopher has no business being named the acting capo of Paulie's crew for a temporary period at this point in his career, whether he's Tony's heir or not.
Although he is less bothered by it than Tony, he is one of the many mobsters who are repulsed by Ralphie beating Tracy to death, banning him from the Bing for life for the show of disrespect. Silvio himself is a violent pimp who hit the same woman before for skipping work, but what Ralphie did was Disproportionate Retribution, even to Sil.
His reaction to Carlo stabbing Fat Dom to death indicates that Sil was content to simply give Fat Dom a beating to teach him a lesson and felt he didn't deserve to die for his cracks he made about the DiMeo mobsters' sexuality.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Generally he’s not this. Except when gambling is involved, at which point Sil is throwing insults left and right, even in Tony’s direction. Chris has to warn Matt and Sean to not even speak to him, and Matt learns the hard way when he tries sweeping up cheese near Silvio’s feet. Come to think of it, he's aggressive when it comes to anything competitive.
Happily Married: Despite his prodigious sexual appetite, Sil and his wife Gabriella are shown to be close and loving.
Hidden Depths:
In season 6, he may have an interest in the Halloween franchise, as shown when JT Dolan is pitching Cleaver to the crew. He has something of a narrow perspective on a what a slasher film is regarding supernatural elements, but he's quick to point out that Michael Myers is an escaped mental patient and not a supernatural force.
In season 6, he's shown to have a lot of anxiety about taking over the family from Tony if he ever needed to and mentions in season 1 that he once saw a therapist.
Honest Advisor: Never lies to Tony, and does something behind his back only once (stealing floor tiles for construction), and even then only to send Tony a message when Tony wasn't listening to his advice, and at the end of the day pays Tony part of the money he got from selling it.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Arguably the best decision Tony made as boss was promoting Silvio to Consigliere. In this position, Silvio is one of the only characters who never falls into The Peter Principle. He is a great and honest advisor, knows when to properly critique Tony and when to hold back, and due to him not wanting to be the boss, he's one of the few people Tony can trust to not be The Starscream. It can be argued that Silvio is one of the few things that kept the ship moving as long as it did.
I Was Quite a Looker: One of the few guys on the show where it's probably averted. According to the prequel, Silvio was a prematurely balding, weaselly looking dweeb in his youth. After getting a good hairpiece and growing to look pretty tough and dignified in middle age, he arguably looks better as an older man than he did in his 20s.
It's Personal: Upon finding out that Meadow's soccer coach sexually abused one of Meadow's friends (with Silvio's daughter part of that same team and circle of friends), Sil asks Tony who he wants to take the guy out. When Tony cites this trope, it turns out that that's just what Silvio wanted to hear.
"I'll give him a real after-school special!"
Kick the Dog: An infamous example in the fifth season. He coldly insults and executes Adriana as she begs him for her life. The worst thing is that she hardly gave the Feds anything and the Feds weren't exactly kind to Adriana either. He is also terribly abusive to Tracee.
Literal-Minded: He's a blunt man and not one for metaphor. In one amusing exchange, he can't decipher Gerry's meaning when his counterpart in New York muses on Phil's heart giving out right as he was poised to claim the big seat.
Tony: What the fuck happened to Gary Cooper? That's what I'd like to know
Sil: (...) He died.
Living Lie Detector: Silvio is this when it comes to Tony. They are about as close to best friends as you can get in the Mafia and it's subtle but throughout the series, you can see Silvio reading Tony like a book. For an example of this, take a look at Silvio's face during the scene where a bedridden Tony tells the guys that "Chris didn't have his seatbelt on (at the time of the car crash), so his chest filled up and he suffocated on his own blood...seems like that's the cause of death." Silvio senses that Tony is obfuscating what really happened but he keeps it to himself.
Man of Wealth and Taste: He's a much snazzier dresser than the rest of the Jersey Mob, at least.
Minor Major Character: Sil remains a supporting character through and through; the closest he gets to A Day in the Limelight are the B-plots in "Christopher" (where he partakes in some Cultural Posturing about Columbus Day) and "Mayham" (where he becomes acting boss while Tony is in a coma). He evens talks of himself as being more of a 'behind-the-scenes' guy.
Morality Chain: Sil, as Tony's consigliere, unofficially serves as this, with "morality" being a VERY relative term. He often acts to rein in Tony's more destructive and rash impulses, especially those that would negatively impact the DiMeo crime family's standing, earning power, or morale. It's Silvio who counsels Tony to hand over Tony Blundetto when he goes rogue and nearly causes a mob war with the Lupertazzi family, and later strongly recommends Tony reject Vito's bid to return to the fold when he's outed as gay, as it would not only hurt their relationship with New York but cause tremendous internal strife.
Moral Myopia: Silvio dotes on his "Principessa" Heather and disdains her coach for sexually abusing one of classmates. He sees no contradiction between this and sexually exploiting all the young women at Bada Bing while acting as an abusive pimp.
Nerdy Inhaler: Suddenly finds himself needing one for the first time in years after stepping up as acting boss. The added stress of the position causes an asthma attack which puts him in the hospital.
Offscreen Villainy: The man runs a strip club that doubles as a brothel and is almost always escorted by some stunning girl or another at dinners, but his obvious infidelities are not explicitly portrayed, mostly alluded to, nor is his goomah. In combination with being Out of Focus, it makes him look less sleazy than his peers.
Chris: How about you Sil? Fucking every slut you got working for you when you got a wife and kid at home.
Only Sane Man: Within the warped logic of the Mafia code, Silvio is the most pragmatic, level-headed, and professional member of the crew, always there to stop any trouble or random violence that might erupt among the more Ax-Crazy mobsters. He also serves as Tony's rational mind.
OOC Is Serious Business:
He acts wildly out of character in the Columbus Day episode, causing major headaches for Tony over Italian pride and showing just how jumped up he is. It makes a little more sense that this was meant to be Paulie, but Tony Sirico was unavailable for the episode.
Him sanctioning Patsy Parisi's insubordination in "No Show" is a sign of just how fed up everyone is with Tony's nepotism towards Chris.
Papa Wolf: Shows this side of himself in "Boca", when he hears that his daughter Heather (whom he lovingly calls "The Principessa")'s soccer coach is having an affair with one of the girls on the team. Sil lies in wait to murder the bastard before Tony calls off the hit.
The Peter Principle: "Mayham" demonstrates that he's correct to stay in his position as number two in the organization; while he has the intelligence and temperament required for the being the family boss, he cannot handle the stress that comes with being the top decision-maker. Thus, he is vastly unsuited for the sudden promotion to acting boss that Tony's injuries from getting shot forces him into.
Politically Incorrect Villain: While more mellow about it than most of the other mobsters, he's still quite racist and homophobic, at one point praising the late Richie Aprile for disowning his gay son. He is also vehemently misogynistic and treats women, other than his wife and daughter, horribly.
Punch-Clock Villain: He seems to get very little personal enjoyment out of being a mobster; it's just what he does.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He's usually the most sensible mobster in the show, except when he temporarily becomes boss; he's on the edge of a nervous breakdown the entire time and the family doesn't like his decisions.
Satellite Character: Downplayed. He has personality, but when he appears it is mostly with other mobsters. Tony, Paulie and Christopher, in comparison, are often seen in their personal lives.
Self-Made Man: He's the owner of the Bada Bing, strip club and Jersey Mafia headquarters, but all in all, a serious business. He also has a hand in the music industry.
Shout-Out: In "Mayham", when he and his wife Gabriella are discussing his stewardship of the Soprano crew while Tony is in a coma, Silvio states "With great power, comes great responsibility", Spider-Man's old adage.
Sleeping with the Boss: While never shown, Silvio's close encounters with the Bing's workers seem to be vox populi and a regular practice. When Chris accuses him of it in front of his wife, Silvio doesn't deny it.
Sore Loser: Normally one of the more even-tempered mobsters...unless a card game's not going his way. Even at his daughter's soccer game, he hurls insults and kicks dirt onto a referee because of a red card.
This Is Gonna Suck: Sil only intended to kick Fat Dom's ass and send him on his way, but Dom using a homophobic insult made Carlo, anti-gay even by mob standards, snap and murder him. When Tony arrives despite Sil's best efforts to not involve him, Sil looks incredibly guilty and apprehensive.
Uncertain Doom: His ultimate fate is vague. He's near-fatally shot in a hit during the mob war with the Lupertazzis; he narrowly survives, but will likely never regain consciousness.
Unfit for Greatness: Sil is a great adviser, but he's no boss and he knows it. He prefers to be in the shadows giving Tony counsel.
Undying Loyalty: Arguably the only member of the family that Tony relies on and trusts 100% from beginning to end. He is one of the very few who always stands by Tony. He refuses to take part in New York's conspiracy against him and is a pretty good friend outside of criminal matters. He's also very supportive when Tony confesses he's been in therapy and doesn't judge him.
Villainous Friendship: With Tony. They go back a long way. Tony even gives him a pass when Sil tries to undermine his authority.
Villains Out Shopping: He's angry about having to attend Livia's wake because it's at the same time as the New York Jets' first home game of the season.
Villain Protagonist: While he's much more level headed than his compatriots, Silvio is ultimately just as cold-blooded as they are, if not more so.
What the Hell, Hero?: In the most polite way possible calls out Tony over his pride as if he didn't want to hurt his feelings.
Would Hit a Girl: Goes with the territory as a strip club owner and sort of pimp. Sil had no problem going upside Tracee's head when she played hooky from work and had the nerve to give him lip. And of course, he was the guy who killed Adriana for being a rat.
You Didn't See That: While he tries to frantically keep Tony from seeing Fat Dom's body and thus involving himself, Sil hurriedly hustles him out the door telling him "you go, Ton', you don't know nothin'!" while Tony just hurredly wishes Sil's family quick recovery from the flu.