Abusive Parents:
In flashbacks, both of his parents are portrayed as highly manipulative and callous narcissists who regularly prioritized their own needs at their children's expense. Whereas Tony's father is portrayed as a corrupting influence who was alarmingly indifferent to his children's emotional well-being, his mother, Livia, is revealed to have regularly subjected Tony and his siblings to physical and emotional abuse that has left them psychologically scarred as adults.
Zig-Zagged regarding his behavior towards A.J. and Meadow, particularly starting from the third season. While he genuinely loves and ultimately cares for their well-beings, he's emotionally and verbally abusive towards both of them (more-so the former) fairly often, has threatened physical violence towards them at least once, has little issue intimidating them if he feels the need to, and generally does little to shield them from his temper tantrums, among other things. He's definitely a better parent to A.J. and Meadow than his own parents were towards him, but he's still very flawed.
Action Dad: He's a family man (albeit a very rustic one) and a ruthless, strong, mob boss at the same time.
Aesop Amnesia: At the very end of the series finale, when AJ brings up the reflective advice Tony gave to his children at the end of Season 1, "focus on the good times", Tony has forgotten about it and even scolds AJ for being sarcastic. This showcases his diminishing wisdom, and overall degradation, as his narrative journey has driven him to a worse place than where he started.
Affably Evil: ZigZagged. Despite being ruthless and very rough around the edges with a lot of people, he's perfectly capable of genuine kindness (particularly towards his family), and is friendly with his friends and subordinates, so long as they don't piss him off. However, starting in season 3, largely due to the murder of Big Pussy and the stresses of being The Don gradually piling up, Tony gradually becomes more mean-spirited, callous and aggressive in his interactions, even with people close to him, only sporadically being able to project any sensibility. Even so, his deteriorating personality and repulsive actions later on erode much of his likeable traits.
Age-Gap Romance: With most of his goomahs, particularly Irina.
All for Nothing: The series ends with Tony failing all of his longterm goals due to a combination of his personal greed, ego, fierce temper, and inability to change himself.
He starts seeing a therapist in the beginning of the series to deal with his psychological issues and better his interpersonal problems. While his crippling panic attacks do eventually cease, his psychological issues and interpersonal issues become worse than ever by the end of the series as he becomes a much colder and more hostile person. His therapist recognizes that she's become an accomplice to Tony, helping him become more manipulative and cunning rather than a better person, and permanently cuts him off as a patient. Even at the very end, Tony insults her, goes on a whining self-pity party to try and convince her otherwise, and pretends like it was his choice to end therapy all along, showing how little he's improved even after so many years.
He spends much of the series grooming Christopher to be his successor and eventually boss of the family after he retires (or technically, installing Christopher as a Mouth of Sauron to avoid prosecution and retribution). Their relationship repeatedly becomes strained despite Chris' Undying Loyalty, until it is broken irreparably and two utterly despise each other by Season 6. Tony eventually realizes Chris' impulsiveness, emotional insecurities, violent tendencies, and crippling drug addictions render him far too much of a liability to everyone else around him and he kills him. To top it off, Tony comes out of it not with sadness but with relief that such a useless burden was dealt with, although the question of who else could be his successor never comes up again until the last episode, when there aren't many options left at that point.
The entire series shows how he rose from captain to the boss of the DiMeo family and his attempts to navigate the criminal underworld, including maintaining affable relationships with other criminal families, keeping the money rolling in, keeping the loyalty of his underlings, and evading the attention of law enforcement and the FBI. All this eventually proves for naught. His relationship with the more powerful Lupertazzi family deteriorates into a full-scale Mob War that irreparably cripples the DiMeo family, most of his top earners end up biting the dust over the series, his remaining men have all lost faith in his leadership due to his numerous failures, with the implication of a possible coup in the near future, and the FBI has obtained damning testimonies against Tony, making a near-future trial likely to convict him. All in all, his terrible leadership only helped hasten his family's decline, and probable impending extinction, far more than law enforcement ever could have done by itself.
He takes great pains to keep his wife and children separated from the criminal side of his career. Unfortunately, the fact this aspect of his life is inseparably entangled with the rest of his life ultimately makes this impossible. A.J. becomes an aimless drifter without any real goals as a teenager who inherits Tony's depression and panic attacks, and ends up only having a low-level job at a mob-owned production company due to his familial connection with Tony, Carmela is completely unable to support herself beyond being a housewife financed by Tony's wealth, and Meadow is gradually corrupted by Tony's lies, with ambitions to become a mob lawyer and continue the family's mafioso legacy, much to Carmela and Tony's disappointment. This is even more so if one ascribes to the interpretation that Tony was shot and killed in front of his family at the end of the series, so now they're going to be horrifically traumatized by witnessing his violent death. Ultimately, Tony's utter refusal to go straight dooms his attempts to keep his family clean right from the get-go.
All Psychology Is Freudian: Played with. Tony Soprano cites Sigmund Freud (whom he learned about in his "semester and a half" of college) to explain to Melfi that he understands therapy "as a concept", but the show deals with psychology a lot, and it really isn't here. Often called the most accurate fictional depiction of what actually happens in therapy. Tony however is diagnosed with a compelling Freudian Excuse and Freud is also the Trope Codifier for Oedipus Complex, one of the Freudian Excuses mentioned often by Melfi despite Tony's repulsion.
All Take and No Give: Tony's primary motivation is for himself rather than the family like he usually says otherwise. Nearly every single action he's had as boss is for his benefit and demands his men bring in the earnings yet he himself never gives anything back to his men, which causes nothing but strife with his crew because of Tony's inability to break away from his selfishness. Christopher even lampshades this, pointing out that all Tony does is take and take without ever giving anything in return. By the end of the series, Tony has taken so much there's virtually nothing left of the family.
Allegorical Character:
Tony Soprano is primarily viewed as a quintessential allegory of the Baby Boomer generation, embodying the anxiety of a 20th-century figure trapped in a 21st-century world and representing the decline of traditional American prosperity, authority, and masculine roles. He is the heir to a mafia order built on traditions, codes of honor, ethnic belonging, and stable community structures, yet he lives in an era that has emptied those pillars of meaning and rendered obsolete the closed systems of authority that once gave coherence to his identity. His constant anxiety, panic attacks, and frustration stem precisely from trying to sustain a model of life that is collapsing before his eyes: a family criminal organization that no longer controls the markets, a younger generation that disregards rituals, a neighborhood being globalized, and a capitalism devoid of loyalty that devours even traditional criminals. In this way, Tony embodies the subject born into a world ordered by robust traditions but forced to survive in a liquid modernity where those certainties have dissolved, turning him into a living anachronism struggling to keep alive a form of crime, masculinity, and cultural identity that time has already condemned to extinction.
Little Carmine: He's an old fashioned guy pop, very allegorical.
During "Kennedy and Heidi", Tony essentially becomes a living allegory of postmodern nihilism. What happens to Tony after "Kennedy and Heidi" is not simply that he embraces nihilism; rather, the entire series, through him, becomes a mirror of what postmodern thought has diagnosed as the condition of contemporary man: the impossibility of believing in any narrative that gives meaning to existence. For decades, Tony tries to sustain two worlds at the same time—the suburban family man and the mob boss—not because he is a hypocrite in the simple sense, but because he needs both narratives to be true in order to avoid confronting the void beneath them. What "Kennedy and Heidi" destroys is any remaining narrative of hope within him: Tony kills Chrissy, feels relief instead of guilt, takes peyote in the desert, and at the moment of sunrise what Tony “understands” is not that life has meaning, but exactly the opposite: that it doesn’t, and that he is perfectly okay with that.
Almighty Janitor: His gambit for much of the series. Although he begins to run the family after the death of Jackie Aprile, Sr. in the fourth episode, he's technically only a capo during Season 1, and the street boss during Seasons 2-5 while his uncle Junior formally holds the position of boss. He gets the title for real after surviving a gunshot wound by a senile Junior in Season 6, after which his uncle is arrested, released into a mental institution, and cut off by everyone.
Always Someone Better: Tony's never shown to be much bothered at comparisons to Jackie Aprile, but as stable as their working relationship is, he chafes under the direction of Carmine Lupertazzi. Carmine is smarter, more focused, has fewer issues, knows more than Tony and commands far more power and respect. And Tony knows it, given Carmine can give orders Tony has little choice but to obey.
This is part of why Tony can't hack it as a boss: he can't stand that people can be better then him, so he knocks down anyone who ever tries and fails to advance in any way so he can feel better about himself
Ambiguous Situation: One of the most infamous in television history: was he whacked in the final scene of the series? David Chase still won't give a conclusive answer to the question, saying it's for the viewer to decide for themselves.
Animal Lover: He enjoys feeding the ducks which visit his pool. He has a sentimental attachment toward animals, being traumatized by the loss of his childhood dog (as revealed in "In Camelot"). Later, he invests in a racehorse, Pie-O-My, and becomes involved in horse racing through his friend Hesh who owns a stable. When his horse is eventually killed in a fire — possibly set by Ralph Cifaretto — Tony is deeply upset and saddened, arguably more emotional over the loss of the horse than the death of any human character on the show (except maybe Tracee's murder, who he also avenged Ralph over). When he learns that Christopher accidentally killed Adriana's dog, Cosette, during Christopher's intervention, he immediately loses his cool and becomes deeply upset, even threatening to kill Chris with his bare hands (as he did do to Ralph). When informed by Carmela that a black bear has been foraging in his home's backyard while they were separated, during Season 5, he reacts with interest, rather than fear. During his stay in the hospital after his shooting, he can be seen reading a book about dinosaurs. At the same time, several characters point out that he seems to value animal life more than human life.
Animal Motifs: A few:
In House Arrest, Dr. Melfi compares Tony to a shark when diagnosing him with alexithymia: just as a shark has to remain in perpetual motion in order to survive, Tony requires constant action in order to function, as any idle time forces him to grapple with the terrible things he has done and leads to a Villainous BSoD.
In a dream following her rape, Melfi symbolizes him as a rottweiler: a stocky, thick-necked, and violent beast with origins in ancient Rome that she could sic on the man who assaulted her if she really wanted to.
Ralphie at one point calls Tony "a dog with two bones". As in, he can't stand to see someone else happy.
Bears appear to be a big one for Tony. Following his separation from Carmela, the camera compares him to the black bear that keeps showing up in the house's backyard; here he's a portly and potentially violent creature who isn't welcome on the property but can't be completely forced away from it either. A lot of his fights (especially with Ralphie) are reminiscent of a bear mauling someone.
Anti-Villain: In the first few seasons. He's a con artist, a thug, a murderer, an extortionist, and an adulterer. However, he also has a genuine love for his family and close friends, wants to make sure his children are well provided for and remain unaffected by his Mob activities, tries to keep those not involved in the business out of harm's way, has moments of guilt over some of the people he's hurt, and occasionally makes an effort to help others. Over time, he becomes increasingly callous and self-centered as the stress and power of being The Don goes to his head, and he loses almost all of his previous virtues and standards. By Season 4, he's become a full-on Villain Protagonist, and by the last stretch of the series, he decides to fully embrace his evil nature.
Asskicking Leads to Leadership: While Tony recovers from a severe gunshot wound, he notices that his old lieutenants don't follow his orders as readily as they used to, and he suspects that they now see him as weak. Tony responds by goading his hotheaded, musclebound bodyguard into fighting him. He kicks the ever-loving shit out of the much younger man in front of his entire crew, to their visible shock, then calmly walks into the bathroom and coughs up blood into the sink. No one questions his orders after that.
Author Avatar: Many of Tony's psychological and personality traits are clearly inherited from the creator of the work (David Chase), such as his panic attacks, depression, and his relationship with his mother.
Ax-Crazy: When Tony gets really angry, his temper erupts into an animalistic fury that often leads him to make rash decisions without considering the consequences. Perhaps the most terrifying part is how spontaneously it happens.
Badass Boast: Makes a few over the course of the series, though the following one is probably the best example:
Tony: "I'm the motherfucking fucking one who calls the shots! And you better pay me the respect that I gave your brother. Or we're gonna have a problem... a bad one."
Badass in a Nice Suit: Tony frequently dresses in expensive suits to go to business meetings and fancy dinners.
Badass on Paper: His robbery of Feech La Manna's card game is a case of this. The way the story is often related amongst the mobsters in the present day, Tony, Jackie Aprile Sr. and their crew pulled off a daring heist off a respected made man that proved that they were capable and ultimately led to them becoming made themselves. In reality, it was an objectively stupid plan that they only got away with because of their influential mobster family members stepping in to protect them, the fact nobody was actually harmed during the theft, and the group giving several of the game's players their money back. Feech still resents that Tony got away with the stunt and that he was prevented from getting his rightful retribution.
Bad Boss: Zig-Zagged heavily. For a Mafia don, he tries to be reasonable in his business dealings and is fairly progressive. However, the nature of the business means that he often has to crack heads to get his men to follow his authority, and he takes it as a matter of principle that they kick up as much of their earnings as possible into his coffers. He's also perfectly willing to ignore his men's needs when they conflict with his personal desires, and it often causes them to suffer, such as when Benny nearly gets beaten to death by Phil Leotardo because Tony refuses to give up his cousin to him. By the final season, it becomes a Deconstructed Character Archetype; by then, very few of the remaining members of the DiMeo Family have any real faith in Tony as the boss, due to his callousness and questionable decision-making. It reaches the point where Carlo (and possibly Patsy) are strongly implied to be planning on turning against him.
Bald of Evil: He's somewhat bald and a ruthless mob boss.
Being Evil Sucks: For all the rush he gets out of being The Don, it's made painfully clear throughout the entire series that it's destroyed him mentally and emotionally. And that's not even getting into the mess that his immediate family is.
Being Good Sucks: Tony tries to do the right thing once in a while, but for a variety of reasons, he's never more than a few moments away from returning to form. Tony tries to put a excuse for his bad behavior, with a such as that he was robbed of any chance to be something he's not but it rings hollow when we actually see the past outside of his own warped view: Tony truly believes Hard Work Hardly Works and that Evil Pays Better, that the world is a Crapsack World where people are just as bad as him and that no one can get better or improve their lot in life without resorting to villainy.
Being Personal Isn't Professional: At least, it's what he believes, which he charmingly sums up by his motto "I don't shit where I eat". Too bad he makes little effort to actually let even the slightest bits of disrespect slide.
Berserk Button: He's never more than a moment away from lashing out regardless, though a few things in particular REALLY get him going:
Junior remarking that Tony "never had the makings of a varsity athlete" royally pisses him off, and he's angry every time someone brings it up. Mainly because that was Tony's dream and it hurts for him to acknowledge that it ultimately wouldn't have done anything if he had become one.
In spite of his cruelty to humans, animal cruelty sets Tony off. He sees animals as innocent and sometimes associates certain animals with his family.
Whenever someone refers to Green Grove dismissively as a "nursing home", Tony becomes indignant and maintains that it is a "retirement community". He finally relents in calling it a nursing home in "Members Only" during his therapy session with Melfi as a way of defending his mother's behavior. It comes up one final time in "The Second Coming" during A.J.'s therapy session, when A.J. reveals Livia shared her bleak view of the world with him. At hearing this was said in the "nursing home", Tony just quietly facepalms.
Pointing out just one of his many examples of hypocrisy often drives him up a wall. Ralph pushing this button repeatedly ends with fatal consequences.
People crying in his presence isn't something that he is a big fan of. He notably lashes out at A.J. for doing so towards the end of the series. Livia was someone prone to crying a lot, so make of that what you will.
Beyond Redemption: While Tony is a sympathetic character, the show makes it clear time and time again that Tony is a reprehensible, horrible human being who chose to join the life of the mafia. He rejects every out that he's given because he's simply unwilling to give up the power and prestige that being in the mafia gives him. He becomes completely irredeemable when he kills Chris at the end of the show and not only shows no remorse for killing a man he once saw like a son, he was joyous that he was gone. In the penultimate episode, Dr. Melfi herself comes to the conclusion that Tony is beyond saving, and that their therapy sessions are actually making him worse instead of better, and she permanently drops him as a patient.
Big Bad Ensemble: With Phil Leotardo in Season 6. In addition to being the Villain Protagonist, he solidifies tensions with the Lupertazzis (partly motivated by his own anger and ego), and is also the main source of violence, moral decay, selfishness, and paranoia in both his immediate and criminal family, even going so far as to take advantage of his own associates to indulge his vices.
Big Bad Slippage: Along with the antagonists of the show, Tony himself becomes increasingly threatening and problematic to his own crew and family as they come to fear him. Come the second half of Season 6, he causes just as much fear and harm as Phil Leotardo. After all, he also contributed to the escalation of tensions with the Lupertazzis.
Big Brother Instinct:
Towards Janice, despite being the younger sibling. They might have a lot of issues, but laying a hand on her is ill-advised. In "To Save Us All From Satan's Power", when Tony sees that Janice is still suffering pain from the Russian mobster's retaliatory attack, he takes steps to hunt the guy down and, along with Furio, beat seven shades of shit out of him. When Janice finds out what Tony did, she is genuinely moved to tears. And Richie should have counted his lucky stars that Tony wasn't there when he hit Janice.
He also plays it straight with Barbara, who actually is younger than him. When Livia tries to guilt Barbara into letting her live with Barbara and her family, Tony refuses to let it happen because he knows Livia will just cause problems for her.
Big Eater: From generous portions of ice cream to having a lot of sushi, Tony isn't exactly known for lacking in enthusiasm for food.
Big, Screwed-Up Family: Both his immediate family and the crime family he heads are prime examples. He tries to unscrew 'em, but it usually backfires, chiefly because, one way or another, he's one of the main problems.
Black-and-Grey Morality: How he sees the world.
Melfi: [on Christopher] Do you think he'll go to hell?
Tony: No. He's not the type that deserves hell.
Melfi: Who do you think does?
Tony: The worst people. The twisted and demented psychos who kill people for pleasure, the cannibals, the degenerate bastards that molest and torture little kids. They kill babies. The Hitlers. The Pol Pots. Those are the evil fucks that deserve to die, not my nephew.
Melfi: What about you?
Tony: What? Hell? You been listening to me? No, for the same reasons. We're soldiers. Soldiers don't go to hell. It's war. Soldiers they kill other soldiers. We're in a situation where everyone involved knows the stakes and if you're gonna accept those stakes you gotta do certain things. It's business. Soldiers. We follow codes, orders.
Blatant Lies: He's a very infamous mob boss in the region and regularly shows up in criminal investigation news reports, but since he's never been convicted of any crimes, he always denies such accusations vehemently. No one actually believes him, but he's legally untouchable.
Blue-and-Orange Morality: Tony's (admittedly selective) adherence to the Mafia code occasionally introduces these colors into the "grey" morality he believes "soldiers" like himself operate in. He eventually forgives his uncle Junior's part in the plot to kill him, subconsciously legitimizing Junior's act as a justified response to their mob dispute.
Book Dumb: Played With. While he's quite intelligent, and relatively more educated than many of his peers, he's just as prone to malapropisms as the rest of them, and in one instance, is shown to have shockingly poor grammar when he writes a personal letter to Dr. Melfi.
Born in the Wrong Century: Tony is a Politically Incorrect Villain whose profession is long past its mid-20th Century heyday. He tends to react to modern culture, including the growing influence of political correctness, with a mixture of confusion and disdain.
(to Melfi) It's good to be in something from the ground floor, and I came too late for that, I know. But lately I've been getting a feeling that I came at the end. The best is over.
(to Meadow) Out there, it's the 1990s, but in this house, it's 1954. So now and forever, I don't want to hear any sex talk!
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: Downplayed at first, in that Tony's far from a shining example of a parent, but he nonetheless does a decent job of keeping his kids on the straight and narrow. By the last few episodes, he pretty much stops caring, and he acknowledges he's basically failed after catching his son trying to commit suicide.
Break the Badass: He lets out a very vulnerable scream when his uncle shoots him by mistake, and spends the first half of the sixth Season in a coma.
Brilliant, but Lazy: It's quite evident that Tony is smart and capable enough to be many other things than a mob boss; it's just that he never bothers, due to his ample psychological problems. When he was younger, Tony's high school guidance counselor even tells his mother that he has scored very high on the Stanford I.Q. test, but doesn't get any grades higher than D+ because he doesn't apply himself.
Broken Ace: Top of the line in his profession, wealthy, charismatic, powerful, ruthless, has keen business acumen, a beautiful family, and drop-dead goomahs. Underneath it all, he suffers from some serious parental issues and other mental problems, which cause him to have panic attacks.
Broken Pedestal: Many old-school mobsters and his father don't live up to his memories. He himself is one for Christopher.
The Brute: While Tony's main role is being the boss, he's also this. Due to his size, he's probably the physically strongest character in the series (along with Bobby), and he takes full advantage of it. Most of the time, there isn't any strategy to his fights, he just has to get his hands on his opponent and smash them around until they stop moving. His fight with Ralph is a good example of this.
The Bully: He's one towards his associates, ESPECIALLY Christopher. Tony is a successful manager, but he verbally shreds his underlings on a regular basis, and is even shown physically abusing them from time to time. By the final season, it becomes a Deconstructed Character Archetype; his constant abuse of his own men convinces two of them to turn on him.
Bully Hunter: Despite being a major bully himself, Tony reacts angrily to others abusing the defenseless and those who are not part of the mobster lifestyle (and are thus fair game). Abuse of animals, which are both, enrages him.
The Caligula: Slowly becomes this over the course of the series, as the power of being boss goes to his head. It reaches the point where he starts prioritizing his personal desires over the crime family he's supposed to be leading. Killing Ralph over Pie-Oh-My, putting his men's necks on the line by refusing to give up Tony B to Phil Leotardo leads to Tony losing virtually all of his support from his underlings.
Can't Take Criticism: Being the petty manchild that he is, any form of criticism, whether it's his leadership or when others call him out for his hypocrisy and double standards, will cause him to fly off the handle and respond with threats or overt violence. His murder of Ralphie, while ostensibly driven by the latter's killing of Tracee and Pie-Oh-My, is arguably equally motivated by Tony's ego being bruised after Ralphie threw his self-righteous hypocrisy back in his face.
Carpet of Virility: A manly raw trait prominently seen in his private life.
Catchphrase:
"You've gotta be fuckin' kiddin' me!"
"End of story".
"Jesus Christ!", usually said in response to any bad news.
The Chains of Commanding: Tony spends the entire series fluctuating between Damn, It Feels Good to Be a Gangster! and Being Evil Sucks, to the point where it plays a major part in his panic attacks.
Character Development: Negative example. As the series progresses, he becomes more and more egotistical and self-centered, with his attempts to maintain some moral rectitude diminishing or disappearing completely. It reaches the point where he's a completely different person by the final season.
Character Tics:
Tends to facepalm, touch his face, or run his hand over his head a lot when he's agitated or unamused by something.
Breathes heavily through his nose when he's pissed off.
The Charmer: Downplayed. Even though most of his mob friends are just sycophantic yes men, Tony is shown to have a notable knack for charming people. It helps him at crucial moments, like getting the other capos to side with him in the first season to convincing Agent Harris to save his hide during the war with Phil. It also explains why he's more successful with women than a guy with a body and temperament like his would usually be.
Childhood Friends: With Artie Bucco.
Cigar Chomper: Look at the picture. He can be seen smoking a cigar during important events, such as shortly before being told of his mother's death and when disposing of Ralph Cifaretto's corpse. In "A Hit Is a Hit", he gives his doctor and next-door neighbor Bruce Cusamano a box of Cuban cigars as a thank-you present for referring him to Dr. Melfi.
Circular Character Arc: For as much as Tony tries to change himself, he just as easily relapses into his worst self. The final season begins with him suffering a near-death experience which seems to pave the way for true positive growth, before he doubles down on his old ways, and becomes far more monstrous than he'd ever been before.
Cool Car: Like most of the mobsters in the series, he's shown to be partial to Cadillac and Lincoln vehicles. When discussing with Dr. Melfi a bizarre dream in which his penis falls off, he mentions that he went to the guy who used to "work on my Lincoln when I drove Lincolns". For the first four seasons, Tony drives a burgundy 1999 Chevrolet Suburban LT 4x4, but in season 5, this has been replaced with a black Cadillac Escalade ESV. This Escalade is totaled in an accident and quickly replaced with a white Escalade ESV. Tony has this Escalade until the end of the series. He has also occasionally used Carmela's Mercedes-Benz E Class station wagon and drove it when they went places together.
Corrupted Childhood Element: One of the elements of Tony's panic attacks involves the sight of meat, specifically gabagool. With probing from Dr. Melfi, Tony recounts a time as a child where he witnessed his father extort the butcher Mr. Satriale, culminating in him cutting off Satriale's finger. When his mother cut into the meat his father brought home, he had his first fainting attack. Dr. Melfi deduces that the meat, his mother and father’s sexuality, and his realization of his family’s involvement in organized crime is what started triggering his episodes.
The Corrupter: To Bobby near the end of the series. Knowing that he can't physically overpower him, nor take the moral high ground, he decides to bring him down to his level by sending him out on his first hit.
Cosmic Plaything: He believes this about himself. Tony often finds himself in stressful, embarrassing or challenging situations, whether he does anything to deserve them or not; all of which further fuel his victim complex and belief that he's immune to criticism for any of his actions.
What the fuck is it?! I can’t catch a fuckin’ break?!
Culturally Religious: Tony was raised Catholic and is ostensibly practicing, but is almost never seen praying, attending mass, or following any of the moral tenets of the religion. He still claims to believe in God and dislikes AJ's existentialist phase, though often experiences existential dread himself. He is also quick to dismiss Paulie and Christopher's superstitious attitudes, is uncomfortable with receiving any sort of religious counsel, and befriends a physicist in the hospital, being taken with his attitudes on life and the universe.
Damn, It Feels Good to Be a Gangster!: Zig-Zagged. Sure, Tony has a nice house, nice suits, and makes a lot of money, but he has to face his boorish family all the time (and vice versa), suffers from depression and anxiety attacks, and he always has to worry about his "friends" turning on him, maybe leading to his arrest or assassination. He outright admits to his therapist that a depressing ending for someone in his line of work is his only reasonable fate.
Deadpan Snarker: Has his moments. Tends to mix sarcasm and plain bluntness. An example:
Tony: What did you wanna talk about?
Richie: Fuckin' Dick Barone!
Tony: Well, as long as the two of you are happy.
He even had his moments as a child.
Dickie: (referring to a comic Tony is reading) There were Jews in the Middle Ages?
Tony: Well… the Bible.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Tony and his arc take a deglamorized look number of classic mob media tropes:
Chiefly, he's a devastatingly realistic portrayal of The Don. Tony is very much not a ridiculously powerful kingpin with a great number of resources like most Mafia bosses in fiction (or even other bosses in the show, like Carmine or Johnny); what he actually has access to is much more limited. This makes sense, since the show is set in modern times, where tougher racketeering laws give Tony a lot of trouble. The crime family he leads shows that The Mafia today is crumbling under pressure from informants, the government, infighting within the various families, and drugs. On top of this, the family he runs is located in New Jersey, meaning that he can't compete with the power of the major families across the river. While those families work with him for mutual benefit, and he is friends with a number of them, they tend to use their overwhelming power advantage to force better deals for themselves and, behind his back, they speak of him as a small fry. By the end of the series, this family is basically on its way to extinction, since they simply do not have the manpower to rebound from the Mob War they got involved in with the New York family.
Additionally, his personality is a far cry from the wise and honorable Neighborhood-Friendly Gangsters like Vito Corleone. Despite his genial demeanor, it's made very clear that at his core, Tony is a manipulative, short-tempered, childish narcissist who only gets worse over time, as all his various justifications for his lifestyle and his claims of honor are revealed as hollow or simply the excuses of a self-serving hypocrite.
He's also one of the Justified Criminal archetype. Tony begins the series by going to therapy and expressing remorse over a lot of what he's done, but it becomes apparent as the series goes on that he's mostly looking for salvation without doing anything to actually earn it. Tony believes that since he feels bad about the things he's done, he deserves some form of redemption and is better than his contemporaries (despite being just as complicit as them, not to mention being the boss of his crew). As his therapist continually shuts down his Necessarily Evil motivations, he mostly comes away from their sessions less with a desire to change his ways, and more armed with language to excuse the bad things he's done. This unwillingness to change is part of what eventually turns him into a full-blown Villain Protagonist.
Tony's parenting is also one for Evil Parents Want Good Kids. Thanks to his struggles with the morality of his criminal actions, coupled with the decline of the mafia lifestyle, Tony wants Meadow and AJ to avoid getting involved with the mob and become honest citizens. Unfortunately, the combination of Tony himself not having good role models to model his parenting after, his inability to hide what he does from the kids despite his best efforts, his own frequent Parental Hypocrisy, and constant pampering and nepotism he and Carmela bestow upon them has resulted in both Meadow and AJ becoming spoiled, materialistic brats with entitled attitudes, weak moral compasses, and poor work ethics. The few decent qualities they do have such as Meadow's academic success or AJ's abhorrence of violence are largely in spite of Tony's parenting, and are still not enough to overcome the environment they grew up in. As a result, by the end of the series Tony has largely failed to raise his children to become good kids, with Meadow engaged to the son of one of Tony's soldiers and on her way to becoming a mob lawyer, while AJ's last chance of making something of himself is working a low level job at Little Carmine Lupertazzi's movie production company.
Delusions of Eloquence: A Running Gag in the earlier seasons was his habit of repeating pearls of wisdom learned from Dr. Melfi in their therapy sessions, often butchering the phrasing or bringing them up to other people in completely different contexts (such as mistaking Melfi's reference to Cap d'Antibes, a luxury resort in the French Riviera, for somebody named Captain Teebs).
Delusions of Parental Love: Tony goes back and forth between insisting to his therapist that his parents were noble, upstanding people who did the best they could raising him and defending them against the (completely true and accurate) accusations that they were terrible people in reality, or begrudgingly admitting that they're a lot of the reason he's a psychological mess as an adult. At one point, his therapist points out how ridiculous it is that Tony is forgiving his mother for trying to murder him, just for putting her in a nursing home, instead blaming himself for making her do it by being a bad son. A lot of this has to do with his Italian Mafia career indoctrinating the importance and value of family above all, making it very hard for him to admit his family sucked, despite the fact he struggles to think of even one pleasant childhood memory when asked (the best he can come up with is one time his father slipped and hurt himself). After his mother's death, he backpedals considerably on the truth that she never loved him and tries to convince himself she tried her best and he deserved her abuse.
Dirty Coward: Downplayed. Although Tony Soprano is usually a legitimately bold Frontline General who won't hesitate to get his hands dirty, there is a moment when he's cowardly abusing his power as mob boss to get Bobby to perform his first kill knowing although Bobby could take him in a fight Bobby won't due to severe repercussions from killing a mob boss.
Disproportionate Retribution: In the pilot episode, Tony chases down Alex Mahaffey, an HMO employee and gambling addict in debt to him and Hesh. He hits Mahaffey with his car, punches his broken leg, and takes turns with Christopher to beat him while he's down. Tony later has Hesh and Salvatore Bonpensiero meet Mahaffey to casually threaten to throw him off a bridge if he doesn't agree to fund fraudulent medical claims to his HMO company for paying off his debts. It is here where Mahaffey apologises to Hesh for not paying him back and adds that he never meant to denigrate Tony, but we don't hear any details of the denigration to justify his maiming.
The Don: HEAVILY deconstructed in a number of ways. While he does try to to rein in the worst parts of his own family, and keep business going to some degree, his own numerous character flaws, as well as the fucked up people he tends to manage, always get in the way. It's pretty evident by the tail end of season 5 that Tony is NOT an effective boss, never mind authority figure, and nearly all his capos are either dead, imprisoned, turned informant, or otherwise lost faith in his leadership by the end of the show.
Don't Celebrate Just Yet: After he kills Christopher, Tony is very frustrated for one reason: not only is he not guilty, he's jubilant such a thorn on his side is gone. But so many others are mourning that Tony can't celebrate and it's driving him up the wall. He has to go on a trip to gamble, sleep with Chris's ex and get high so he can just celebrate Christopher being gone.
Dragon-in-Chief: Despite Uncle Jun being the leader of the DiMeo Crime Family after Jackie Sr.'s death, everyone acknowledges Tony as the real boss behind the scenes, even the FBI, to the point that they try to bug the Sopranos' residence rather than Junior's. Junior pretends not to realize this, but eventually the friction between nephew and uncle regarding this blows up into a major resentment and fight among themselves. Tony eventually does become the true leader of the family, but by then it's a Pyrrhic Victory due to Junior falling into dementia and the Family's antics catching up to them in the form of the Lupertazzis.
Dramatically Missing the Point: He hates the story of his father shooting a hole through his mother's beehive hairdo that Janice reminisces on because it makes their family look dysfunctional. Rather than, you know, actually being dysfunctional. It's one of many, many instances of Tony trying to ignore his parents' innumerable sins to convince himself they were good people.
The Dreaded: From the moment we're introduced to him, it's clear that Tony is NOT someone you want to cross. By the fourth season and onward, everyone in the Mafia is terrified of Tony. They know how unpredictable his temper is, especially after Tony's murder of Ralph, and go out of their way to avoid his wrath. If they're smart, anyway. However, this only goes so far; the Five Families in New York and the Camorra across the pond treat Tony and his underlings like a joke behind his back.
Dream-Crushing Handicap: The Many Saints of Newark reveals Tony's life goal was to become a professional football player. Unfortunately, putting aside the influence the mob lifestyle had on him, he simply didn't have the size to make it to the professional ranks. Mentioning this to him is a major Berserk Button.
Driven by Envy: Tony cannot tolerate seeing others around him being happy and improving themselves when Tony is incapable of doing the same. Out of jealousy and spite, Tony deliberately sabotages others around him to make himself feel better and bring them down to his level without an ounce of remorse. If anything, Tony relishes the deed.
Drunk with Power: Over the course of the series, the power and status of being Boss gets to Tony's head and he begins to make decisions based on what he wants rather than what's actually best for the entire family and the business. And he expects all of his underlings to go along with them no matter what their feelings on the matter are.
AM/FM Characterization: His favorite musical genre is Classic Rock, particularly of the 1960s and 1970s. Over the course of the show he is seen to enjoy AC/DC, Deep Purple, The Eagles, Eric Clapton, Jefferson Airplane, Jethro Tull, Journey, Lynyrd Skynyrd, Pink Floyd, Rush, Steely Dan, The Clash, The Chi Lites, The Lost Boys, Tom Petty And The Heartbreakers, and Van Morrison.
The Dutiful Son: The one who took care of his mother after his sisters had moved on with their lives. It's deconstructed, because his mother is shown to be a cruel and despicable person who mercilessly lashes out at anyone within earshot, making it incredibly clear why Tony's sisters vamoosed from her as soon as they could, and it took a huge toll on Tony's mental state being forced to be around Livia for so long.
Enraged by Idiocy: He's a hothead in general, but the stupidity of his mooks and his family members ranks near the top of his list of triggers. In "Remember When", he considers murdering Paulie for his annoying, dimwitted, blabbermouth tendencies.
Epiphany Therapy: Zigzagged; sometimes the therapy leads him to be somehow gentler, but most of the time, it is a tool to hone his managerial (read criminal) skills. It's ultimately subverted; rather than becoming a better person, Tony is crueler and more selfish than he's ever been by the end of the series, and Dr. Melfi recognizes that he's beyond help, permanently cutting him off as a patient.
Equal-Opportunity Evil:
Although the Mafia is of course restricted to ethnic Italians — and it seems the Jersey crime family is fairly strict with that rule — Tony is more than happy to do business with anyone who won't snitch. And although he professes to be disgusted by homosexuality, it's clear when Vito is outed that he hates the idea of giving up a big earner much, much more than he's interested in enforcing traditional Mafia norms. He also says that a large part of him wants to just let Vito live his own life and he believes what consenting adults do is their own business. Before ordering a hit on Vito, he complains to Sil that he would have been ok if Vito had kept his "lifestyle" more private.
Despite his bigotry towards black people, he has indulged in a number of scams and schemes with African-American criminals that have been mutually very profitable, even engaging in very congenial interactions with them in the course of said scams, although in some cases this is simply due to Pragmatic Villainy; the crimes are less likely to tie back to him when people outside his gang and ethnicity commit them for him.
Erotic Dream: He has had more than a few erotic dreams throughout the series, including one with his psychiatrist Dr. Melfi in her office.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: A very complex issue, given what his mother is like, and his upbringing indoctrinating the idea of putting your parents on a pedestal. Straight example at first, he has many reasons for contempt and as befits a depressive individual, he goes through phases of love, hate, denial, anger, and acceptance. By the end of the series, he seems willing to apply a nostalgia filter over his sociopathic mother.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
No matter how amoral he becomes and how much he whines about them, he truly does care about his children. His reaction to AJ's suicide attempt is to drop whatever he was eating at the moment and rescue AJ from the pool and comfort him at the poolside all while calling him "baby" and at the verge of tears. And his reaction to a Lupertazzi mobster that's sexually harassing Meadow is to personally come to their territory and literally curb-stomp the mobster, despite such an act being a direct violation of Mafia conduct, which ultimately dooms his crew.
His relationship with his uncle is complicated, but he ultimately cares about him. He forgives him for the murder attempt (both of them) and is very supportive when "Uncle Jun" is diagnosed with cancer. He spends most of the last season angry with him but in their final scene, Tony desperately tries to make Junior remember his old life as he can't bear to see the old man like that and is brought to tears when he realizes his uncle is a shell of his former self and doesn't even know who he is anymore.
Even Evil Has Standards: Despite his profession, he tries to prevent people uninvolved with the crime business from getting hurt in the process, and was horrified at Ralph's brutal murder of the stripper he'd impregnated and tried to abandon. Similarly, he grows increasingly disgusted with his late father after learning of the extent to which he disregarded his family's needs and silently vows to never become like him. Ultimately Subverted, in that despite his attempts to do the noble thing, Tony repeatedly falls back into his destructive patterns and ultimately resigns himself to his true nature by the second half of Season 6. To say nothing of his nasty track record of doing exactly the same stuff he often chastises others for.
As tenuous as Jackie's grasp on leadership was, Tony still respected him. When Brendan mocks Jackie's cancer, Tony picks him up and hurls him out the door.
When Pussy was suspected as a rat, Tony made it clear to Paulie that he wasn't to be killed unless absolute proof of his betrayal could be found.
Tony has a soft spot for animals. He is outraged to learn that Christopher drunkenly killed Adriana's dog, and he kills Ralphie with his bare hands for killing a horse.
Tony does provide for the family members of his men, even if he is not above trying to find ways to spend less money on them like with Vito Jr.
When he was a teenager, he frequently smoked cigarettes and drank alcohol, but he never did marijuana because he knew that could get him in serious trouble and jeopardize his spot on the football team.
He is horrified when he learns one of Meadow's friends slept with their soccer coach, and immediately wants to kill him for it.
When Paulie finds out Nucci isn't his mother he cuts her off financially and threatens to throw her out on the street. Tony is shocked at this and brings up all the times Nucci cared for him and bailed him out of jail and is dismayed to hear about their falling out.
He is more open minded towards AJ's relationship with Blanca, a dark-skinned Latina, than Carmela is, primarily because Blanca's also Catholic.
Although almost every gift he has ever given Carmella is either stolen or in some way the proceeds of crime, he purchased her engagement ring legitimately.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: Because Tony prefers to believe that everyone else in the world is just as bad as him deep down and trying to be good isn't worth it, he's often dumbfounded when he comes across good people who stick to their morals and principles. When Officer Wilmore refuses to accept any blood money from Tony, despite being demoted as an officer and forced to take a second job because of him, Tony can't understand why he wouldn't take the handout.
Evil Feels Good: One of the reasons Tony never even considers the possibility of leaving his criminal life behind is because he likes being respected and feared, commanding power, and bending the law to his favor, such as being able to kill or beat up people he doesn't like with relative impunity. When he tries to actually be a waste management consultant in an episode to prop up a possible cover story, he's quickly bored to tears by even the glimmer of honest work and breaks out in a rash. Ultimately, it blinds him to the fact that life as a mobster is self-destructive degradation, destroying both his body and soul, and that of those around him.
Evil Genius: It's repeatedly made clear that Tony is observant, intelligent, and the brains behind the Jersey mob. He mentions once to Johnny Sack that he has an IQ of 136, which depending on the specific test could put him in the top percentile. Unfortunately, this high IQ score ends up making him think he can do no wrong, over-inflating his ego and resulting in some poor decisions due to thinking he knows better than everyone else.
Evil Is Petty: He never forgets to take time to treat people under him terribly, often for extremely minor slights against him.
A standout example is his fight with Bobby (which he provoked by insulting Janice). After being beaten bloody by his brother-in-law, Tony initially tries to let it go by admitting that he was justified to attack him, but then reneges and accuses Bobby of cheating with a sucker punch. He then punishes him by making him commit the murder of a Canadian civilian, thus dirtying Bobby's hands for self-satisfaction.
Evil Parents Want Good Kids: He hopes that both his children will escape the life of crime he has led and has always tried to conceal his criminal life from them — something that Meadow saw through early on and A.J. also realized with guidance from his sister. In A.J.'s case it's partly pragmatic; Tony understands a Lazy Bum like him would almost certainly not survive the cutthroat criminal underworld and grooms Christopher as his successor instead. It winds up deconstructed over the series, as while Tony wants them to be good kids, several contributing factors from his upbringing and career have left him with no idea how to raise them to be such. Thus, he ultimately fails to do so.
Evil Uncle: Throughout the series, Tony is a bullying Jerkass to Chris though it's not as prevalent in the early seasons where Chris was a Morality Pet and example of Even Evil Has Loved Ones for Tony. Eventually, Tony's poor treatment of Chris (coupled with Christopher's own self-destructive failings) causes him to relapse and ultimately leads to Tony killing him.
Expy:
A Deconstruction of some of Vito Corleone's traits, as the patriarch of both his immediate and criminal family. He even seems to imitate him in a certain way.
To Michael Corleone as well. While lacking Michael's education, level-headedness and desire to atone, Tony is nonetheless strikingly similar given that both characters feel irrevocably tied to a career in organized crime due to their heritage and struggle to balance their lifestyles as crime bosses and family men while failing miserably.
Façade of Strength: Tony spends most of the series cultivating an alpha-male exterior, even praising Gary Cooper as a model of ideal masculinity, acting tough, ruthless and blunt almost all the time—whether with his immediate family or as a mobster. He certainly enjoys being feared and operating through intimidation; however, in his sessions with Melfi, it becomes clear that he is a deeply emotionally damaged and insecure Manchild who needs someone to listen to him, but also to validate his narcissistic ego.
Fatal Flaw: A few of them:
Tony's Hair-Trigger Temper, Entitled Bastard factor and lack of self-restraint manifests in many ways, from his impulsive violence to his philandering, gambling and substance abuse.
Tony is intelligent enough to realize that the mobster lifestyle is a trap that he has gotten himself caught in, but at the same time, he is also lacks the drive and discipline to get himself out of the trap and work an honest trade.
Egotism is another major one for him. There are many times where Tony could have avoided conflict in the first place by swallowing his pride and being more respectful to his colleagues. It also results in him refusing to take any responsibility for problems that were caused by his poor decision making. It gets to the point where Silvio, of all people, correctly points out that Tony's sin is Pride near the end of Season 5.
Fat Bastard: Starts as a little overweight and gets fatter and more evil as the series goes on, becoming outright obese by the end (he weighs about 280 pounds at the beginning of Season 6, which puts him at extremely overweight for his height).
Faux Affably Evil: Starting from season 3, he dips heavily into this. He will often act friendly to those he is just about to do something horrible to, like Jackie Jr and Phil Leotardo, just to taunt them. This is mostly relegated to people who piss him off, but Tony clearly gets a kick out of it. That being said, he's still not above doing something genuinely kind-hearted from time to time.
First-Name Basis: He's almost exclusively called Tony or T by his friends. Whenever someone calls him Anthony, it's usually an authority figure like his parents or Dr Melfi trying to reason with him.
Foot-Dragging Divorcee: A very savvy one, he invokes Loophole Abuse by tainting every potential attorney with a conflict of interest.
Formerly Fat / Formerly Fit: He flip-flopped between these across his lifetime; most flashbacks to his pre-teen years in the show and the first half of the Many Saints of Newark show him to be overweight (the latter film even retconning a scene from season 1 where his younger self was quite skinny) but in high school he was much more lean and athletic, having played on the football team. Over the timespan of the series, he went from being mildly overweight to morbidly obese.
Freudian Excuse: He hates the mere concept of the excuse, yet he's diagnosed with a very powerful one; Tony was literally born into the mob, and his abusive parents wrote the proverbial book about how not to raise a model citizen. His mommy issues are one of his major malfunctions, he's full of love and hate towards his unpleasable mother, and constantly struggles with his "Well Done, Son" Guy nature.
Tony: This is gonna sound stupid, but I saw at one point that our mothers are... bus drivers. No, they are the bus. See, they're the vehicle that gets us here. They drop us off and go on their way. They continue on their journey. And the problem is that we keep tryin' to get back on the bus, instead of just lettin' it go.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: An example where the troubled person subconsciously admitting it to himself. At the same time, however, it's shown that Tony did have people in his life who tried to steer him away from a criminal lifestyle, like his high school football coach, and even had the opportunity to earn a college degree at Seton Hall before pursuing a legitimate career path. Meanwhile, his younger sister Barbara grew up in the same environment as he and Janice did, but she was able to escape and live a legitimate life outside of the mob, proving that it wasn't insurmountable. Ultimately, he chose to enter the mob on his own volition despite being well aware of the immorality of the job because he wasn't interested in honest work and had numerous chances to go straight but refused to do so. In other words, whilst his parents did warp his mindset, he still had every chance to escape the lifestyle but chose not to.
(Subconscious) Coach Molinaro: I suppose you blame it on your father when you're crying to that shrink of yours.
Tony: Ehh, more my mother.
Molinaro: [chuckles] Of course, even better.
Frontline General: One reason Tony is an effective leader in a war. Despite the Lupertazzi Family being stronger and biggr than the Jersey crews, Tony goes to the mattresses with his men and takes the same risks they do while fighting on the front.
The Gadfly: Sometimes, Tony just likes screwing with people for the hell of it, such as when he mocks Junior's *ahem* ability to please his partners, as well as getting Matt to sweep the floor while Sil is in a bad mood.
The Gambling Addict: Gets progressively worse towards the end of the series. At one point, he tries to get Carmela to use the profits of a house sale to bet on the Jets. His inability (or unwillingness) to pay his debts (incurred due to gambling losses) basically ruins his friendship with trusted confidant and advisor Hesh Rabkin.
Genius Bruiser: Undoubtedly a smart guy, although without much formal education (he never finished college). What book learning he has, he only really has a vague grasp of, although that's enough to set him apart from the others. He's particularly in tune with Sun Tzu's The Art of War. His strength is also never in doubt; one of the first episodes has him effortlessly pick up and throw someone across a room.
In The Many Saints of Newark, we learn that high school-aged Tony scored very high on the Stanford I.Q. test, but can't get his grades up past D+ because he doesn't apply himself.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Almost to the point of Exaggeration. Tony's fuse is extremely short, and only gets shorter as the series goes on. Listing all the examples of him losing his temper would likely take up multiple pages.
Has a Type: Brunettes with strong, often toxic personality and independence. It's explicitly addressed there is a resemblance to his mother.
Hates Their Parent: He understandably hates his mother for her abusive, narcissistic personality. Something he doesn't want to outright admit to himself due to Italian family values until after she tries to have him whacked. He then zig-zags on this after her death, sometimes believing that she did the best she could.
Head-in-the-Sand Management: For all of his talents as a mob boss, Tony has a habit of letting problems fester until they become a real problem.
He doesn't grasp that Junior and Livia want him dead until he is presented with actual recorded evidence of it - and after an assassination attempt has already taken place.
Richie Aprile is an obvious problem from the get-go, but he takes a long time to decide to dispose of him (and he isn't even the one who eventually does it anyway).
It is implied that he knows, subconsciously, that Pussy is a rat long before he takes action (and, again, it is only after he finds indisputable proof of it). This gives Pussy months' worth of time to give away additional information to the Feds.
Due to family loyalty/sentimentalism, he allows Tony B to take out multiple significant members of the New York mob before finally coming to terms with the fact that Tony B needs to be done away with.
Averted in the cases of Feech and Jack Masserone. Tony relies on his gut instinct and vibes (something which is discussed by him in the episode "Rat Pack") to quickly put aside those two problems.
The Hero Dies: For a given value of "hero", anyway. He’s strongly implied to have died in the final episode.
Hero with an F in Good: Tony will occasionally attempt to do something good for others out of some sense of moral obligation, but then fail due to his half-hearted way of going about it. This in turn feeds his continued choice of being a criminal and his growing cynicism as the series goes on.
In the first episode Tony finds out his uncle Junior intends to use his friend Artie's restaurant as the site for an upcoming hit. He's unable to convince Junior to change his mind about the hit's location and can't convince Artie to close the restaurant for a few weeks to go on an all-paid vacation (due to refusing to divulge why), so he decides the only remaining course of action is to blow up Artie's restaurant. Although the insurance covers the damages, Artie is nonetheless devastated by the loss of his prized establishment, and is furious when he discovers Tony was responsible. In a confrontation, he is incredulous that blowing up the restaurant was somehow the only course of action Tony could think of, and it breaks their friendship for a very long time. It also ends up being made All for Nothing much later due another one of Tony's men pulling a credit card scam in Artie's new restaurant, driving away much of his business, the very thing Tony wanted to avoid have happen in the first place.
He tries to keep Jackie Jr. away from crime out of respect for Jackie Sr.'s late wishes, even letting him date Meadow. However, Jackie Jr.'s own dimwittedness and being surrounded by Tony's criminal associates who continue to corrupt Jackie Jr. with ideas of how "cool" being a mobster is cause him to pursue the gang lifestyle. He also tentatively forgives Jackie Jr. after catching him cheating on Meadow. With no corrective father figure in Jackie Jr.'s life or any sort of real discipline he eventually flunks out of school and does something horribly stupid to try and gain respect. At this point, Tony gives up and orders him executed.
He wants Christopher to kick his substance abuse addiction due to him starting to become a liability and nuisance to others as a result, but at the same time repeatedly belittles his sobriety, demeans him socially, and tempts him with drinks. As a result, Christopher grows to resent Tony, repeatedly relapses as a coping mechanism, and eventually dies due to driving while high. Tony refuses to accept any sort of responsibility for this and considers Christopher a disgrace who had it coming, despite him previously saying he considered Chris like a second son and being the one who delivered the finishing blow to begin with.
He doesn't want either of his kids to get involved with crime, but at the same time, looks down on empathetic learning environments (considering them too soft and coddling), surrounds them in wealth earned from crime and horrible role models, giving them a warped sense of morality, and is overall an incredibly flawed paternal figure who uses fear and anger to keep them in line. Meadow is unable to find a boyfriend who isn't related to Tony's circle of crime and eventually abandons a prospective medical career due to coming to see her father and his associates as being targeted minorities rather than murderous criminals, and A.J. becomes an aimlessly suicidal depressive drifting from one low-level job to another, whose last career in the show is another low-level job that Tony is only able to get him due to it being owned by a mobster he has connections with.
He's approached by Vito's widow, begging for $100,000 to relocate to Maine to escape the stigma of Vito being the highly publicized subject of a Homophobic Hate Crime, which Vito's son is badly bullied for. Tony is extremely reluctant to give up this much money and tries to squirm his way out of the idea however he can. When he can't find a way to avoid paying up, he collects the necessary money only to waste it on a sports bet that he loses. So he chooses the cheaper and crueler option of sending Vito's son to a military school where corporal punishment is allowed, and he's dragged off kicking and screaming.
His Own Worst Enemy: Ultimately, it's up to Tony to make the changes he needs to overcome his depression, and by the end of the series, it's clear that his selfishness and ego won't allow him to make a better life for himself. With all the ugliness he displays towards others in an attempt to deflect blame from himself for his own shortcomings, Melfi's comment that "depression is rage turned inward" rings especially true here.
Honesty Is the Best Policy: One of the long-term aesops of his character is that this is true, at least when it comes to his relationships. Being unable to be straightforward with his family ends up irrevocably damaging his children, as they realize they either have to look the other way or rationalize what he does with transparent explanations, making it impossible for them to fit in with normal kids their age. And the culture of lying makes it wildly easy for him to cheat on his wife in a way that makes their relationship long-term a joke.
Honorary Uncle: He's not related to Christopher Moltisanti by blood, who is actually Carmela's cousin, but Tony still considers him a nephew. Tony was very close to Dickie Moltisanti, Christopher's biological father, who was a kind of second father figure to the young Tony. He's also this to children of his fellow wiseguys, due to the code of brotherhood.
Horrible Judge of Character: Zig-Zagged. Although he is aware that he chooses to surround himself with a bunch of murderers who might be gunning for his seat, and experience has taught him which of his family members (domestic and criminal) are blatant threats to his position (such as Feech La Manna, Richie Aprile, and Janice), he has numerous standout cases of poor judgment of character:
He completely fails to recognize the total liability that Christopher is, in spite of Christopher's chronic drug addiction, constant insubordination, blatant disrespect, and frequent antagonism towards the other capos. He resists taking any decisive action until "Kennedy and Heidi", where he finally decides to kill Christopher following a near-fatal drug-induced car crash. This blind spot is largely because Christopher's father Dickie Moltisanti was an important mentor and father figure (more-so than Johnny Boy) to Tony himself.
He is chronically prone to replicating his relationship with his mother in his extramarital affairs, dating manipulative, emotionally volatile, depressive, brunette women who are a constant threat to his actual marriage. Dr. Melfi tries to get him to see the pattern, but he never catches on.
He keeps Salvatore "Big Pussy" Bonpensiero around as a soldier and close confidant in his crew, even in spite of significant evidence pointing to him as a federal cooperator. Looks exchanged by Silvio and Paulie indicate that they were aware that Sal wasn't exactly out of the woods just because Jimmy Altieri "ate the pill" for him, but didn't feel it was worth arguing with Tony since, at the time, Sal was out of the picture. "Funhouse" implies that Tony had always been aware that Pussy was a snitch, but was unwilling to face it.
Even though Richie Aprile is openly hostile, resentful, and insubordinate to Tony and the others from the moment he's released from prison, Tony initially dismisses the idea that Richie would be plotting to remove Tony as boss out of hand when Junior informs him. It's only when Junior tells him everyone Richie has spoken to about the plan that Tony finally listens to his uncle.
Related to the above, a significant number of Tony's capos turn out to be federal cooperators, including Eugene Pontecorvo, Carlo Gervasi, and Ray Curto. Not to mention that Adriana, whom he develops a soft spot for, is also a cooperating informant. Tony is completely unaware in most cases, to the point that Eugene and Ray die without Tony ever discovering their betrayals. Even when he finds out, it's only after it's bitten him in the ass.
Downplayed with respect to his mother, Livia. He originally denies that Livia is capable of any real harm and is unable to face her deep-seated emotional issues and the impact they have left on him. Eventually, with the help of therapy and her attempt to have him whacked, he comes to face the fact that she was a deeply troubled woman who negatively impacted his childhood, but is unable to truly reconcile those truths about his mother with his Nostalgia Filter, as well as his need to displace all of his life problems on her, as he is entirely unable to consciously face the impact that Johnny Boy Soprano left on him as a father.
Believes his son AJ to essentially be a good person, with that being the excuse he presents for why AJ could never adopt the mafia lifestyle. This is after AJ has attempted to murder Junior Soprano, admittedly in retribution for shooting his father and folding, and not long before AJ becomes complicit (albeit unwillingly and due to hanging out with the sons of Tony's fellow gangsters) in melting a college student's toe with highly corrosive acid over a gambling debt, and collaborates in an assault against another Somalian student over a bike accident.
He considers Tracee, who's only a couple of years older than Meadow, to be an innocent Hooker with a Heart of Gold and resents Ralph for murdering her. While Tracee may have been young, she was far from innocent as she was a prostitute, a neglectful mother who left her child with her mother to hang out with her mobster boyfriend for days at a time, and a deadbeat who claimed to be sick while not even calling into work for several days. Johnny Sack even calls out Tony for putting her on a pedestal.
Outright lampshaded when Tony's friend Jack Massarone, an associate of the DiMeo crime family, is suspected to have become an FBI informant based on circumstantial evidence presented by Patsy. Tony meets with Massarone in private on the basis that he knows how Massarone thinks and can instantly tell when he's lying. He fails entirely, instead just makes Massarone very suspicious of Tony, and when Tony returns to the Bada Bing he wonders why he even thought he could be a Living Lie Detector. It only takes him noticing Massarone's compliments of his supposed weight loss and accepting that they were obvious attempts at diverting suspicion despite being patently untrue that Tony okays the hit.
He believes that Jimmy Petrille, Johnny's consigliere, is a harmless and sweet guy. Petrille turns out to be an ever bigger traitor than Adriana could ever hope to be, who gave the feds eighteen years worth of Johnny's criminal activities which resulted in his complete collapse. Needless to say, if Tony would have made any deals in front of Petrille, he would have been thrown into prison by Season 6.
In the final season, Tony believes that Phil Leotardo is, at the end of the day, primarily motivated by Greed like all the other mobsters and he can be placated by good business deals. Unfortunately, it turns out that Phil is primarily driven by pride and his principles, and he eventually decides to launch an all-out war between the DiMeos and Lupertazzis so he can get his revenge, business be damned. This is partly because Phil could be talked down for a while until one indignities too many made him snap.
How the Mighty Have Fallen: By the last few episodes, Tony is effectively the king of a pile of ruins. All his best men are either dead, on death's door, or have clearly lost faith in his leadership. He's hiding in a dinky safehouse with Red Shirts who also don't trust him, he has an indictment looming with Carlo turning witness, and he sleeps with a rifle from the sheer paranoia. If the possible hitman at the diner didn't get him, then the indictment likely will.
His immediate family isn't much better: Meadow is fully gearing up to be a lawyer defending criminals, Carmela is the same materialistic, miserable housewife she was from the start, and A.J.'s current career path isn't likely to keep him distracted from his depression for a meaningful period of time. Janice is also well on her way to becoming Livia, and Junior has fully succumbed to dementia.
Hypocrisy Callout: Tony is frequently called out by others for being the self-righteous hypocrite. Yet even when Tony knows they are right, his ego and petty immaturity won't allow him to accept it and always lets his wrath get the better of him, his murder of Ralphie being a prime example.
Hypocrite: One of the biggest examples, in a series full of them. Tony is notorious for not practicing what he preaches:
He believes all men should be "The strong, silent type like Gary Cooper". He repeatedly proves himself to be neither, easily losing his temper and yelling at people, and psychologically being very weak.
He disparages civilian Italian-Americans like Bruce Cusamano for being "Wonder Bread WOPs" who are disconnected from their Italian roots. Tony, all of his family and his associates, bar Furio, are just as Americanized as they are, to the point he sticks out like a sore thumb when he actually visits Naples and interacts with born and raised Italians. Tony doesn't even know how to speak Italian, bar a handful of phrases and words.
He goes ballistic at even the thought of his wife cheating on him and is furious at Jackie Jr. for being unfaithful to Meadow. Tony himself sleeps around all the time and even gets angry whenever Carmela confronts him about this. Even when they make agreements about continuing their marriage amicably during a rough patch, Tony still can't bring himself to promise he won't cheat on her anymore.
When Tony's infidelity reaches a boiling point, and he tries to make a case that he sleeps around with other women, such as Svetlana, partly because of their ability to converse well, and because they actually had to struggle in life, Carmela accurately points out that he barely even actually knows almost any of the women he sleeps with, and even calls him a hypocrite for good measure. Tony's only response is to frustratedly stare at her as she walks away, unable to come up with a good counter-argument.
Throughout the series, he ridicules the stereotypical psychiatric patient whining about his mother and shows contempt for anyone he sees as displaying self-pity. In the series finale, Tony delivers a self-pitying monologue about his hard childhood to AJ's therapist and is usually just as quick to follow one of the moments of ridicule with a pity party of his own.
As he makes clear during Christopher and Eugene Pontecorvo's making ceremony, everyone who is a part of the DiMeo Crime Family must prioritize the good of the organization over their blood family. Tony does not follow this at all, as he clearly favors his own kin professionally, particularly Christopher and Tony B, and gives them privileges and breaks he'd never give any other associate. It's particularly egregious in Tony B's case, as he's not even an official member of the family. It's quite telling when, after Tony makes a grand speech about how he'd supposedly protect everyone in his family from retribution by New York, Patsy sarcastically points out that he's full of shit right after he leaves the room.
Patsy: "Thank you. That was great."
After Bobby beats him in a fight, Tony berates him for "sucker-punching" him, calling it a cheap move. This, in spite of the fact that almost every fight Tony's won in the series being started by him sucker-punching the other guy.
When Christopher describes his drug addiction as an inherited disease from his parents, Tony insults this thought by calling it “bullshit.” Later on in the same episode in therapy, he is brought to tears about how his rotten genes is the cause for AJ’s depression.
He occasionally frames the FBI coming after guys like him as discriminatory harassment against Italian-American minorities, scapegoating and generalizing them as being mobsters, in a low-effort attempt to deny accusations about his criminal activities, but in one episode brands an Italian-American FBI agent as a race traitor due to his profession, and is generally very racist against other ethnic groups. There's also the obvious fact Tony fits all the absolute worst stereotypes of an Italian-American to a T, including being not only a mobster but a de facto boss of a mob family.
He mocks Janice faking a disability in order to earn government checks without having to do any honest work, even though the entire point of the no-show jobs he frequently manages, and even takes advantage of, is to let him do the exact same thing.
He frequently makes fun of others like Bobby, Vito, and Ginny, for being fat, despite being obese himself. This is in spite of the fact Bobby is actually stronger than Tony (Tony explicitly gets fatter than Bobby by the beginning of Season 6), Vito actually ends up succeeding in losing a good amount of weight, and Ginny at least attempts to lose weight, while Tony makes no such effort and gets increasingly overweight over the course of the series. An early scene even has Bobby himself call Tony a fat fuck behind his back, and to tell him to look in a mirror.
Christopher calls him one to his face in "Amour Fou", after Jackie Aprile Jr. and his friends rob Eugene Pontecorvo's card game. Chris calls for Jackie's head, as made men were shot at, with Furio being wounded and dealer Sunshine fatally hit, but Tony intimates he wants to give Jackie a pass, as Jackie Sr. was his close friend. Chris explicitly states that Tony expects everyone else to follow the rules, while Tony himself does whatever he pleases, ignoring the rules if they're inconvenient. The fact that Tony immediately responds with anger shows that Chris struck a nerve.
Believes that being a "bad son" is one of the worst things a man can be. It's later revealed that from a young age, he became an accomplice in his father's infidelity, lying to cover his father's cheating. Just after Livia had suffered a miscarriage. He also has called his mother a cunt more than once and even once tried to kill her.
In "For All Debts Public and Private" Tony berates his men for not fulfilling their obligation to Junior, when he cons his uncle in the same episode and generally wants as little to do with him as possible.
He forbids Paulie from going after Ralph due to his prank call that led to his mother getting hospitalized due to him being a made man and their good earner, but after mere suspicion hours later that Ralph may have burned the stable with Pie-O-My for the insurance, he happily does the deed himself.
On that note, any time Tony reiterates to his subordinates that the Mafia is a business ring extremely hollow, given his own tendency to make decisions based on emotion and personal desires, rather than for the benefit of the family. Ralphie, one of the family's best earners, being passed over at least partially due to Tony's distaste for him, is one of the biggest examples. Ralph even engages in a staring contest with Tony himself, after the latter tries to feed the former the line "This is business", essentially saying he knows how hypocritical Tony is being. And when he finally does kill Ralphie, it's for an incredibly personal and petty reason that costs the family one of their best earners for no real benefit.
After Christopher goes to rehab, Tony frequently makes fun of him for abstaining from alcohol, and occasionally tempts him with drinks, even though he was the one who forced him to get clean in the first place. And then whenever Christopher suffers a relapse, Tony will violently berate him for falling Off the Wagon. Christopher even points out that Tony's experiences in therapy should make him more understanding of the recovery process than most, but he dismisses AA as a crutch.
What ultimately pushes him over the edge to kill Chris is him causing a serious road accident while high. In the very same episode, he drives a girl out into the Mojave while off his face on peyote, and in an earlier episode drove while getting a blowjob. Tony had also gotten on the road before his previous car accident in order to accompany Adriana in buying more cocaine for the both of them. Tony justifies killing Chris due to him being a liability and too much of a hot-headed screwup to ever be a capable captain or family breadwinner, despite such descriptions easily applying to himself as well. By the end of the series, Tony himself puts his family in mortal peril and loses practically everything due to the consequences of his own impulsive actions and bad choices.
Dr. Melfi refuses to provide any more therapy to Tony after she reaches the conclusion that he is beyond therapeutic help, it just makes him better at manipulating people and at justifying his criminal actions. Tony tries to backtrack at first, but when he realizes her decision is final he just calls her immoral.
He takes AJ on a drive through his old neighborhood in Newark to impart some fatherly wisdom to his son. The neighborhood has become rundown since most of the Italian families have left, but Tony points out that the church that was built there by the first generation of Italian immigrants is still in good shape because of the dedication of Italian Catholics who drive miles to attend Sunday service there. This prompts AJ to ask why they never go, which clearly irritates Tony to the point where he refuses to answer.
He constantly whines and screeches about how he wishes he could beat his son A.J. as a form of punishment to keep him in line, repeatedly threatening to do so, and the only things preventing it are child abuse laws and Carmela coddling him, something that he resents Carmela for. Dr. Melfi, in turn, points out that Tony himself also wished that his own mother would've protected him against his own father's beatings and a large part of why he resents his older sister Janice is because she left home, leaving him to care for their hateful mother alone. The fact that Tony has no response to this whatsoever speaks volumes.
A big part of Tony's illegal income is trapping his clients with loans that have atrocious interest rates. He has no sympathy even for longtime friends unable to pay him back, including in one case roughing him up, forcing one into bankruptcy, and ruining his life to ensure he coughs up what he owes, and ordering those who can't repay to be brutalized or even murdered instead. However, when Tony himself falls into a loan debt to his friend Hesh, he avoids paying out as long as he can, gets angry when Hesh keeps asking about it, and even considers having Hesh killed to avoid having to pay it back.
He tells his therapist that people like him won't go to Hell because they follow codes and morals, unlike other criminals. This is in spite of the fact Tony breaks the Mafia's codes and morals he preaches whenever it suits his needs (which is frequently), such as unilaterally killing made guys twice and seriously considering killing another simply due to his raging temper, having another mobster whacked in front of his family, and ratting out other criminals, including one of his own capos. If anything, Tony is the least loyal to the code of any mobster in the show (although this is obviously helped by him being the main character and having by far the most screen time). This is lampshaded by other characters more than once.
Another reason he thinks people like him shouldn’t go to hell, is because they are soldiers who accepted the stakes where you should be expected to be shot at, killed, or do the killing yourself towards other soldiers, because they accepted the stakes of being one. This justification is proven to be utterly false throughout the show, with Tony himself murdering his fair share of innocent people that have nothing to do with the mob, like a nursing home owner for spreading a correct rumor about himself, or a drummer in a custody battle in order to get a discount for some pharmaceuticals.
In the same speech, he attempts to justify his dubious career path by stating how the upper class exploited lower-class citizens like Italian-American immigrants to get their wealth, making money hand over foot on the labour of the less fortunate. He doesn't seem to put it together, or attempts to put together a false equivalence to make himself look better, that the mob is doing the exact same thing now, as their means of income rely entirely on exploiting the labours of the less fortunate, except, if anything, they're even worse because they give absolutely nothing back, unlike the corporations and governments he explicitly compares his "business" to, which at least built cities and subways using the labours of the lower-class.
One of the most glaring examples is when Furio tells Tony he's sad because his father died recently; Tony immediately, and very callously, brushes it off and orders him to "get over it". The very next scene has Tony blubbering in therapy, in full self-pitying mode over the death of a horse. When Dr. Melfi points out it was ultimately just a horse and tries analyzing the subconscious meaning behind it, Tony calls her callous for not just letting him have a moment of personal sadness.
Tony attempts to convince Artie that his crush on Adriana is foolish, pointing out that the age difference, among other factors, makes such a thing inappropriate; Tony himself, being around the same age as Artie, later develops sexual tension with her that would've resulted in an affair if not for outside circumstances.
Uses the lethargy of US Customs to smuggle Italian goods (such as scooters and expensive cheese) without any hesitation, but after seeing a news report which highlighted the issues faced by Customs which can be used for terrorist incidents (such as smuggling nuclear bombs in one of the shipments), Tony absolutely panics and spends the remainder of the show paranoid about terrorists.
Tells off Bobby for his inability to "control" Janice, but his separation only occurred because he failed to do so with Carmela, only avoiding the divorce with the help of Loophole Abuse as well as Carmela's own hesitation in proceeding for it.
He engages in the mockery of Christopher's infant daughter when Paulie makes some very inappropriate and sexist jokes about her in front of everyone, even telling off Chris for getting angry that they were just messing around. When Coco does the same thing to his daughter Meadow, Tony is so furious he drives all the way to New York and delivers a brutal beating for doing that to his daughter and nearly kills him by crushing his teeth.
It's especially hypocritical that when Tony is confronted by Carmine Jr. about nearly killing Coco, Tony justifies it that he insulted his daughter, his own family, yet Tony laughed at Paulies sexist jokes to Christopher's infant daughter, Tony was mocking his own family without the slightest regard for how Christopher, his nephew, felt that he helped ridicule an infant baby.
In general, when people have a point he agrees with or they are doing something in his best interests, Tony will agree at the moment. The moment Tony feels like something he agreed with is a obligation he doesn't want to deal with or that he is limited by his own words he'll do what he wants damn the consequences. Tony's whole character revolves around Moral Myopia.
Tony is a proud Catholic and reminds people of it whenever he could, but by the end of his Character Development, he manages to embody all the Seven Deadly Sins instead, with Pride being his prominent sin, as noted by Silvio.
Hypocrite Has a Point: Despite the many glaring examples of hypocrisy, as detailed above, Tony nonetheless has a valid point with some of his criticisms towards others, as well as an understandable reason for doing some of what he does, even though it might contradict some of his beliefs.
He forbids Jackie from ever seeing Meadow due to finding him cheating on her, as he doesn't truly want his kids to end up like him or their marriage where he is philandering around with other women.
He initially protected Jackie from the consequences of his actions despite ordering murders for less, because Jackie Sr. was his good friend and Jr. did seem to have a good future before bungling it all for supposed respect. Ultimately, Jackie Jr. was the one who ignored all of Tony's advice and efforts to keep him out of the mob and put himself in a situation where Tony couldn't protect him any longer.
Tony initially chafing at the thought of making Ralphie captain. While it's very much simply due to the former intensely disliking the latter, it's also understandably motivated by Ralphie's growing negative influence on Jackie Jr.
He and Janice might both be ripping off the federal government in their own ways but he still does have to do some degree of work to support his family and is putting his own neck on the line doing so while Janice is a shameless mooch averse to any real responsibilities.
While his ideal man is a stoic man supposedly like Gary Cooper and Tony himself is quite emotional as mentioned above, it is shown that mobsters appearing stoic do earn more respect than those wearing their emotions on their sleeves. Christopher is often mocked for his tantrums and impulsiveness while Tony gets away with his own outbursts because he is the boss, and Phil Leotardo lost all respect for his former boss Johnny Sack for sobbing when he was arrested in front of her daughter just as her wedding party was ending.
Him not surrendering Tony B to the New York mob is laced with favoritism, which Chris and Silvio call him out on. But, Tony not wanting to hand him over was also valid, as for all the mafia code of conduct, the crew is essentially forcing him to hand his own cousin over to appease Phil, an Ax-Crazy mobster who eventually ignores every appeasement made towards him for personal reasons, and Johnny, who caused a Mob War because he didn't like Little Carmine.
Hypocritical Heartwarming: Tony is a shameless skirt-chaser who is repeatedly unfaithful to Carmela. When he finds Jackie Jr cheating on Meadow, he's enraged and absolutely pummels him in the bathroom.
I Am What I Am: Occasionally, he'll accept that he's a ruthless, predatory crook and outright tell others of this fact, such as when Davey is forced to put up his sporting goods store to settle his gambling debts with Tony. Tony intentionally let Davey gamble his way into bankruptcy knowing that he'd be forced to give his store to them when he lost. In his attempts to console Davey, Tony explicitly compares himself to the scorpion in the fable of the scorpion and the frog, that's it's simply in his nature to prey on the vulnerable. However, it becomes increasingly clear that these are simply excuses he uses to avoid having to change anything about himself, because it's easier to accept that you'll always be a lowlife than to make the effort to improve yourself.
"This is how a guy like me makes a living: this is my bread and butter."
Iconic Outfit: The white bathrobe, A-shirt, boxer trunks, and slippers, which are inherited by his Cleaver expy.
I Coulda Been a Contender!:
He briefly went to college, was an athlete, and sometimes remarks his life could have been very different under other circumstances, as he remembers that his mother frustrated the more legit dreams of his father.
One of his nightmares was where he was in a locker room all by himself, only to come upon the office of his deceased football coach. The coach, who is once again a living man, chastises Tony for dropping out of school. He remarks how he spent countless hours with Tony on the football field, only to throw it away by going into crime. He said if Tony had listened to his conscience, he could have continued on in a career in sports, possibly succeeding him as a coach. This gave insight to that Tony did not originally intend to be a mobster and had some inklings towards a legitimate life.
Ignored Epiphany: After recovering from his coma, he realizes that life is too short, and vows to treat every day as a gift and better his relationships with others. It isn't too long before he's worse than ever, gambling more frivolously, getting angered more easily, treating his family members far more rudely than he did prior, and has done nothing to improve himself as a person and is getting worse instead. His therapist notices he's not exactly succeeding in his vow to treat every day like a gift and tries to steer him back on course, but all in vain; by the end of the series, Tony is a morally broken man.
I'm a Man; I Can't Help It: He uses this justification whenever he has an affair with another goomah, as though he has to seduce every attractive woman that exchanges more than one sentence with him. His therapist points out this is nonsense, and as a grown adult, he has every ability to control his inhibitions, in the same sense you don't have to eat all the food at the table. Not that Tony ever takes it to heart, more than once attempting to seduce her too. Even when Carmela makes him stop cheating on her if he wants their relationship to improve, he only agrees on it if the terms are changed so that she will never find out about him cheating anymore.
Irony:
After spending Season 6B discovering new depths he could slip to as well as diplomatically handling New York looking down on their "glorified crew", his ultimate downfall is not triggered by either of his callous actions in the half-season or even New York (read, Phil and Butchie) making the first move, it's his brutal beatdown of Coco after he harassed Meadow which enraged Phil to no longer pretend to treat Jersey as equals. In short, it's one of his very few good deeds that ends up ruining his crew.
If Tony does die at the end of the episode, it's not entirely because of his mafia life, but also because he let his guard down amidst what remains of his family (even him looking up at the front door opening can be taken to mean Tony expecting Meadow, rather than someone with a warrant or a gun).
It's All About Me: At first, he's just rather self-involved. But by the end of the series, it's warped to the point that he sees everyone (aside from his immediate family) as a tool for his own gratification or self-advancement and increasingly devotes all his time jealously guarding the power he spent his whole criminal career accumulating.
I Was Quite a Looker: In the present of the series, Tony has gotten quite overweight and is balding with age. Nonetheless, it is frequently brought up that he had a strong and athletic build in his earlier years, and is ultimately shown to have been a Long-Haired Pretty Boy in the prime of his youth. Despite this, he has no problem seducing any woman he wants despite having long lost his good looks.
Jerkass: Even beyond his stone-cold personality and ruthlessness, he is still a short-tempered, bigoted bully towards virtually everyone he talks to. Whenever he seems to improve, he's quickly back to his same old dickish self before anyone knows it.
Jerkass Has a Point: Tony tends to raise a valid point in his rants and grievances toward others, even if his reasons are self-serving and never fully justify his asshole behavior.
Whilst he is horribly abusive towards Georgie, he is still paying him a salary as he himself points out and the latter should be able to work a phone at his age or at least ask Tony how to operate it if he's unsure.
When he says that Tracie should definitely abort her next kid if it comes from Ralphie as the father, you have no idea how much he means it!
He is right that Carmela is happy to benefit from his immoral acts and only disapproves when they affect her negatively.
Similarly, he's right that Meadow's self-righteousness about Tony's lifestyle is pretty hollow considering that she's happy to live a life of luxury with the money he earns from it.
It may come off as harsh, but he's right that the customers at Vesuvio are only annoyed by Artie's corny jokes.
He's trying to deflect the attention from the fact he wanted to have sex with Adriana when he says Chris seems like he should be more concerned for her than he is, but it is still a valid point.
When Chris looks like he disagrees with his murder of Ralph, Tony points out that Ralph was a terrible person who had it coming for a long time.
While he endangers the whole family by not giving away Tony B. to Phil to be tortured to death and Silvio points out some of it has more to do with not taking shit from Johnny than loyalty to his cousin, they are still asking him to have his beloved cousin painfully murdered to appease the psychos in New York.
When arguing about the Tony B. situation with Johnny Tony points out that all of the deaths are on Johnny more than anyone else since he started the war by having Lorraine killed.
Jerk Jock: In high school as a star athlete for the Varsity football team. Nevertheless, even as a middle-aged mobster, he has a vicarious fixation on AJ's high school sports and frequently displays a lingering fondness for locker-room humor, much to the annoyance of his wife and children.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Gradually subverted as the series goes on. He genuinely loves his family and friends, and he really does make an effort to change his ways, even if it tends to be futile. However, as time goes on, he discards his virtues and becomes just as despicable as the mobsters he butts heads with. He also ends up hurting the family and friends he claims to care about with his own selfish behavior and narcissism, as well as murdering both his cousin and nephew. By the end of the show, he possesses virtually no redeeming qualities, bar his love for animals and his immediate family (however tainted).
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Tony initially appears to be a Tragic Villain who's kept sympathetic by numerous moral boundaries, a genuine love for his family, and seeming to make an effort to change his criminal ways. However, as the show goes on, it shows that, although he does have some sympathetic moments and traits, deep down he is a selfish, hypocritical, and violent thug who wants to be told he's better without doing anything to earn it because he loves being feared as a mob boss and would rather die than give that up, no matter how many people he cares about are killed or ruined as a result of his criminal activities. By the end of the show, the only thing that keeps Tony from being completely loathsome is that he still cares about his immediate family, even if he's also a terrible husband and father.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: While Tony was never a role model but rather off-kilter and a massive prick, his behavior wasn't completely unrelatable or uncalled for, and some of his actions in the earlier parts of the series are at least understandable. Come the final Season (6B), the narrative fully shows how warped he has become, more spiteful and hateful than ever, being egotistic and mean without precedents to characters that served as his morality pets to some degree, like Christopher, Carmela and Hesh.
Justified Criminal: At least, that's how he sees it. It becomes more and more clear as the series goes on that he's just making excuses for himself.
Karma Houdini Warranty: It's complicated, but it's there. Tony often gets away with the bad stuff he does, largely due to being The Don. He also got away with killing Christopher completely without any repercussions, while everyone around him was devastated. However, this goes away by the final stretch of the series, as things start to catch up to him and his luck starts to run out. The final scene leaves him to an Uncertain Doom, [[spoiler:either murdered by a hitman or eventually imprisoned by the impending RICO charges. And even if, somehow, neither of those fates happened, his crime family was already teetering on the brink of extinction at this point, due to nearly all his inner circle and primary earners being dead or otherwise incapacitated at this point, making things even harder. And Tony's own personal family is more broken than it's ever been, and is trapped in another cycle of misery and crime for at least another generation.
Kavorka Man: Despite growing increasingly bald and fat with age, his notorious reputation as the powerful Don of a Mafia family, and his charismatic personality work almost unfailingly in his favor when seducing women. Any woman he wants, he easily can get (only his therapist consistently rejects his advances, and even she repeatedly admits being attracted to him). He often cheats on his wife, who became attracted to him for similar reasons while in high school (coupled with the fact that he was considerably more attractive then, as evidenced by a flashback from "In Camelot" and in The Many Saints of Newark).
Kick the Dog: A central part of his characterization. His kinder actions are usually followed by malignant and purely spiteful actions towards someone who did nothing to deserve it. His maiming and beatdown of Mahaffey is one instance. Georgie, the bartender at the Bada Bing, is also one of the frequent dogs, and Christopher is usually not far behind.
Kick the Morality Pet:
He callously reacts to Artie's suicide attempt, making it about him and forcing Artie to keep quiet about his involvement as he cares more about protecting his own reputation than what Artie is going through.
Plenty of examples in Season 6B:
Tony's murder of Christopher, the same man who was like a son to him and saw Tony as a Mentor in earlier seasons. He shows no remorse afterwards, only relief and satisfaction.
After Bobby beat him in a fight, after he repeatedly insulted his wife Janice, Tony, wanting to regain the sense of authority that he has as boss, spitefully makes Bobby commit his first murder, in spite of his father’s wishes of never wanting him to get into that, the man Tony ordered to get whacked was also an innocent drummer, who Tony had murdered over a discount for some pills.
He desires to help Vito's family with some good money so they can move on, but his own priorities interfere and he finally goes with the cheapest, harshest option.
He disparages, insults and finally alienates his friend Hesh over a gambling-related loan debt.
Has a really nasty fight with Carmela after she doesn't share the spec house money for his gambling.
Tony: When I die, you can live in a dumpster for all I care!
Kindhearted Cat Lover: In the series finale, he finds a stray cat at his safehouse during the war with New York and takes a liking to it. He brings it back to Satriale's, where it stares at the deceased Chris Moltisanti's photo (much to Paulie's dismay).
Lack of Empathy: As a ruthless mob boss, Tony really doesn’t lose much sleep for his actions, even his most repulsive ones, and therefore can’t really empathize with people when they show complex human emotion, to the point he usually gets angry or annoyed when he sees someone expressing grief over a close loss or lamenting problems with a personal issue. When he does feel guilt, it’s mostly based on himself and his poor me attitude. Best examples include:
When Artie gets sentimental over his restaurant being burnt down, Tony doesn’t really understand why since the place is insured, in spite of the fact that he knows the family value this restaurant has to Artie.
When Carmela confronts him about skipping A.J.’s swim meet, and points out how disappointed A.J. looked when his father didn’t show up, Tony couldn’t care less, still resenting A.J. for turning down his invitation to go fishing in order to spend time with his friends instead. Carmela notes how pathetically childish this line of thought is.
After torturing and murdering Matthew Bevilaqua, Tony and Big Pussy have a wholesome dinner, where they eat freely and crack jokes.
The entire Davey Scatino storyline:
Tony does not care or sympathize with ruining the life of a childhood friend by driving him to bankruptcy to cover up a debt, and he shamelessly admits that he made him play in the high stakes card games, knowing he would lose as “his job.”
Tony doesn't even contemplate that collecting part of the debt with Eric's car and then giving it straight away to Meadow, knowing she is good friends with Eric, is not the best idea. It understandably causes a blowup.
When Meadow tells him that Davey has been put in a mental facility due to his actions, Tony doesn’t have anything resembling an empathetic reaction, and calmly eats his cereal.
When he sees Furio start crying over his recently deceased father, Tony bluntly tells him to get over it. This then immediately cuts to Tony blubbering to his therapist about the death of a horse.
After sadistically beating Zellman with a belt, over the pettiest reason, when Zellman starts crying, all Tony says to him is to cry like a bitch.
Tony achieves the dubious distinction of being justifiably called out by Ralph —another colossal sociopath— for the absence of genuine commiseration he shows toward Ralph's comatose son, Justin.
Tony doesn’t understand why Carmela is so furious with him for his countless infidelities, cause “she knew the deal” when he married him.
At the worst timing possible, he coldly breaks it off with Valentina after she burned herself, in typical Tony fashion he thinks that giving her financial security is enough to fix the issue, completely disregarding any mental turmoil that she might have been facing, and when Valentina threatens to kill herself, Tony nonchalantly takes a phone call.
Instead of comforting or feeling sorry for Christopher after he is saddened for his fiancé being murdered, Tony instead decides to viciously beat him, because he stated that he was in pain, something that pissed Tony off greatly because he was dealing with his own personal problems, which he saw as more important and greater than Christopher’s.
When Meadow starts crying and venting about her relationship with Finn deteriorating, Tony is visibly bored and annoyed by her emotional vulnerability, and seemed more concerned with his food being ready than comforting his own daughter’s feelings. He even realizes that he isn’t built for this, and tells Meadow to tell Carmela instead.
After Hesh’s girlfriend Renata dies, Tony gives the laziest and half hearted comforting words possible, and he chose to pay his debt to Hesh in this moment, where money was meaningless to him. Unsurprisingly, this is the moment their longtime friendship ends for good.
He can’t empathize with Christopher not visiting the Bing, which he avoids doing to not trigger a relapse, something Tony himself ordered him to never do. Regardless, all Tony tells Chris is to “show some balls” and even goes as far as to compare Christopher’s drug addiction to his binge eating. Even Christopher is surprised by this, since he would have expected for Tony to atleast understand, since he is in therapy.
Tony looks disgusted, cold, and angry at people mourning the death of Christopher, someone who he deemed an Asshole Victim in his twisted mind and not a family member he intentionally groomed over many years into a sycophantic thug and constantly demeaned.
This is a major reason why Tony's parental skills are so lacking. His very limited empathy and being raised by abusive parents means he has little idea how to keep his children on the straight and narrow beyond threatening them with beatings and screaming at them (he even bemoans child protection laws that prevent him from actually beating them), and he leaves most of the parental guidance to Carmela. Unsurprisingly, this pretty much ruins them once they reach adulthood.
In general, Tony sees others as tools, so he's either indifferent or just annoyed whenever they express their own problems, because he doesn't think of them as people with their own troubles and lives, he sees them as things to make his own life better. This includes even his own family, who he seems to keep around more as status symbols more than something of genuine love and familial closeness, often treating his wife and children terribly.
Large and in Charge: He is a big dude and The Don. Second only to Gentle Giant Bobby, he's the biggest guy on his crew and has enough Stout Strength to deliver quite a beating (even when he lost some of his muscle during his coma in Season 6).
Lead You Can Relate To: A less conventional example, but the heart of what makes viewers sympathize with him, especially in the earlier seasons, is that many of Tony's personal problems outside of his mobster life are relatable to almost anyone, middle-aged men especially: his difficulty in balancing his personal relationships, his deep-seated psychological issues, etc. However, as the series gradually emphasizes Tony's negative traits and his hopeless entrenchment in the mob life, he becomes less and less sympathetic.
A Lighter Shade of Black:
As morally repugnant as Tony can be, the likes of Ralph Cifaretto, Richie Aprile and Phil Leotardo are still around to show that Tony is not the worst of the worst. This makes it possible to continue rooting for him even at his most despicable.
For how narcissistic Tony can be, even he doesn't hold a candle to Janice, who doesn't actually love her children, and sees them more as her possessions.
Like a Son to Me:
Is this to his Uncle Junior, even though they frequently argue and wrestle for power in the family. Junior was the only one genuinely concerned about Tony and his future when the guy was growing up while Johnny remained apathetic, Livia actively abused him, and Dickie corrupted him. Their relationship deteriorates over the course of the series however, with Junior attempting to kill Tony in Season 1 and Tony eventually considering Junior dead to him after Junior shoots and nearly kills Tony after mistaking him for someone else due to dementia. Despite all this, Tony is nonetheless despondent seeing how far Junior has deteriorated in the last episode, and Junior, even though he can hardly remember anything anymore, still recalls playing catch with Tony as a kid,
Early on he feels this way regarding Chris, and explicitly calls hims like a second son, although their relationship is repeatedly strained, usually due to Chris' impulsive decisions and inferiority complex not mixing well with Tony's tendency to break balls and talk down to Chris, and eventually deteriorates beyond repair by Season 6. Tony realizes Chris hates him deep down and in turn loses all respect for Chris when he crashes his car while driving high and kills him.
Like Father, Like Son:
It's discussed by Livia and Junior in the show and confirmed in The Many Saints of Newark, that teenage Tony did many of the same misdeeds that AJ does in the series. Many Saints shows that Tony also got in trouble at school for cheating on tests and frequently partook in underage drinking.
His father also had anxiety attacks and passed out once or twice a year.
As the show progresses, he takes more after his mother's narcissistic, self-pitying personality, being unable to accept that people around him could improve and wanting to spread his internalized misery to them.
Like Parent, Like Spouse: There are many signs that he goes after women who remind him of Livia, something which his therapist points out to Tony repeatedly, although Tony is extremely reluctant to admit it. Especially clear in Many Saints of Newark where Vera Farmiga plays young Livia and she looks and sounds just like Carmella in the series.
Loan Shark: Usury makes up a big portion of Tony's income, and he is ruthless when someone misses a payment, even with childhood friends like David Scatino.
Lonely at the Top: Carmela points out to him in an argument that Tony only has underlings who coddle up to him to try and earn his favour. Aside from Artie Bucco, Tony lacks genuine friends; the closest ones he has in the mob are Jackie Aprile Sr., Pussy Bonpensiero, and Silvio Dante. Jackie and Pussy die early on (the latter by Tony's own hand), he increasingly alienates Artie as the title of "Boss" goes to his head, and Silvio is permanently comatose by the end of the series.
"All due respect. You got no fucking idea what it's like to be number one. Every decision you make affects every facet of every other fucking thing. It's too much to deal with almost. And in the end, you're completely alone with it all."
Love-Obstructing Parents: His over-protectiveness of Meadow has led to feuds between them on several occasions. For example, Noah, her first boyfriend at college was of part black heritage, and Tony's racism led him to try to drive him away. Meadow learned of her father's actions and didn't speak to him for several months, eventually reconciling at Christmas in 2001. Tony actually likes Finn, Meadow's third boyfriend, but Tony's dangerous criminal lifestyle and Meadow's willingness to go along with it nonetheless proves a major deciding factor in him leaving her later.
Manchild: In general, Tony tends to come across as a big kid in the body of a middle-aged mobster. He outright tells Valentina (one of his later goomahs) that what he finds funny are the same things an eight-year-old would find funny. There are also several times throughout the show where he gets into arguments with his children, and they sound more like fights between siblings than arguments between a parent and their children. His tendency to scream and throw things at the slightest provocation also calls to mind a toddler throwing a tantrum at a minor inconvenience.
Manly Tears:
For all his strong, silent type beliefs, he wasn't afraid to shed tears when saving his son from an attempted suicide.
When he hears the news of his best friend Jackie Sr.'s death, he breaks down in tears in front of his capos, who are entirely understanding of him.
Man of Wealth and Taste: Definitely has wealth. Nice suits and a good dinner. That's his good taste. He gets called a gavone (a boorish goombah) by his mother-in-law after some dissonance at a party with some cultured Italians.
Meaningful Name: His surname alludes to the historic practice of castrating young male soprano singers to prevent their voices from deepening after puberty. Much of Tony's characterization hinges on his obsession with traditional masculinity, and his inability to fit into a changing social landscape where such virtues are increasingly viewed as outdated—leading him to feel symbolically "castrated" by modern society.
Mentor: For Christopher in the earlier seasons, due to the importance of blood-ties (although technically Christopher isn't related to him by blood) and grooming him to be his eventual successor. Gradually the relationship is subverted. Christopher grows resentful of Tony, while Tony gradually finds Christopher to be too much a burden due to his drug addictions, violent and impulsive personality, and inferiority complex. After losing all respect for him, Tony kills him, feeling no guilt for the act and even being glad to be rid of him.
Middle Child Syndrome: Janice got most of his father's attention (mostly part of a scam he was part of), while Barbara, being the youngest, got most of his mother's attention.
Mock Millionaire: Downplayed. Technically he is a millionaire, as he mentions in one episode that his house is worth $1.2 million. However, it's eventually revealed that Tony doesn't actually make as much money as his lifestyle would suggest and the reason he is able to afford it, as well as all of the vices he indulges in, is because he lives paycheck-to-paycheck. Hesh even points out Tony spends most of his money as soon as he earns it and has no real liquidity or savings. This causes stress for Carmela, as she knows that if anything happens to him it's unlikely the family will be unable to continue living their life of comfort. When Tony thinks he's going to be arrested in Season 2 and is getting ready to go on the lam, he's only able to leave behind with his lawyer the relatively modest sum of $400,000 for Carmela. This is common for criminal enterprises as they tend to avoid keeping bank accounts full of cash and live paycheck to paycheck to avoid any scrutiny after Al Capone and other mafia bosses got arrested for financial crimes.
Mood-Swinger: When he's severely upset and stressed, he becomes incredibly unpredictable. You never know if he's going to erupt in an animalistic rage or not.
Morton's Fork: One interpretation of his ultimate ambiguous fate in the final episode. Either he is immediately shot to death by a hitman in front of his family, or he'll be indicted and sent to prison for a long time; both possible fates would spell the end for his him and his reign.
The Movie Buff: Has a wide collection of works and a projection room in his house. He regularly watches movies or documentaries at home and usually draws conclusions from them that he then applies to family or business matters. Predictably, he loves gangster films like The Public Enemy (1931) and The Godfather. However, he shows disdain for GoodFellas, since the film was Based on a True Story and Henry Hill sold his life story after ratting to the Feds.
My Greatest Failure: He was supposed to join Tony Blundetto in a robbery, but failed to because he got into an argument with his mother and suffered a panic attack. To hide this from associates (since saying he fainted after getting yelled at by his mother would've been far too embarrassing to admit), he lied that he was unable to participate because he had been mugged by "mulignans" (aka: black men) and injured. Tony B. went ahead and got arrested.
Narcissist: Despite displaying redeeming qualities such as a heartfelt concern for his family's well-being along with a childlike fondness for animals, he is portrayed throughout the series as an exceedingly vain and ruthless mobster who considers himself entitled to unquestioned respect or obedience from those around him. There are numerous examples of Tony caring more for his wants, needs, and problems than the one’s of other people, his response to Christopher being saddened over Adriana’s death, is to beat him instead of providing him comfort, because he believes that his pain (having to kill Tony B) is more important than anyone else’s emotional issues. Another example is when he pathetically beat Zellman up with a belt, because he has been sleeping with Irina (who Tony broke up with already), because she was once his, which automatically makes her off limits to anyone else in Tony’s mind. When Tony B is busy with fixing up things for his children, Tony gets mad at him for not having the time to listen to his whining. He directly sabotages people’s personal growth, because he himself can’t change as a person in the slightest, as shown with Christopher and Janice. And when he kills Christopher, in a dream where Tony speaks the complete truth about his feelings, he only talks about how he doesn’t feel any guilt because he saw Chris as a drag and threat for his own emotions, personal pleasure and survival, not because of the supposed baby seat which he used to justify the murder, it was simply all about him. However, unlike most real-life narcissists, he demonstrates empathy for certain people in his life. He's aware of how his actions affect others and feels legitimately guilty for some of his acts. Nevertheless, he is too consumed by his own selfish desires to meaningfully change his ways. Ultimately, it's left ambiguous as to what the precise nature of Tony's mental dysfunction is, and whether he's truly heartless.
Necessarily Evil: He believes many of his evil actions are a lesser evil, and sometimes the show portrays him in this light — particularly considering that most alternatives for head of the Jersey crew are shown to be too violent, too cruel, too stupid, or unable to handle the pressure.
Nepotism:
He naturally embraces the Thicker Than Water approach, favouring his kin professionally and tolerating situations with Christopher and Tony B that would be finished with a bullet to their head if the same events happened with any other associate. It is eventually subverted when they cross the limits of Tony's leeway.
Janice and A.J also benefit from some unwarranted favoritism regularly.
Zigzagged with Bobby Baccala, who becomes underboss after he marries Tony's sister, but given Bobby is one of the most reliable members of the family, nobody considers the promotion undeserved.
As for himself, it's clear that Tony benefited greatly from being the son of Johnny Boy Soprano. Johnny used his influence as a powerful capo to protect Tony and his crew when they robbed Feech La Manna's card game, a stunt that would've made them all dead men under normal circumstances. Tony inheriting all of Johnny's rackets when the latter died also gave him a significant income and power boost.
Nervous Wreck: Tony's anxiety, depression, and panic attacks are what lead him to start taking therapy sessions from Dr. Melfi at the beginning of the series.
Never Hurt an Innocent: Tony maintains a policy of not killing civilians, although it doesn't stop him from abusing and exploiting them. It's ultimately moot, as most of his capos are responsible for murdering civilians, on screen. Chris and Paulie in particular have murdered several. This is subverted in "Soprano Home Movies" when he has the civilian brother-in-law of a Quebec associate killed to save money on a pharmaceutical deal.
Never My Fault: Roughly half of the conflicts and dilemmas he faces are a consequence of his own behavior and poor decisions, but to him, everything is always someone else's fault, be it Carmela, Chris, Paulie, or his mother. His refusal to take responsibility all but destroys most of his relationships by the end.
Noble Bigot: From his point of view, anyway. In reality, he's overtly mean and bigoted towards Meadow's boyfriend Noah just because he's black and cozying up to his daughter.
Noble Demon: Deconstructed. It's clear from the get-go that Tony is not a good person, but he possesses a few altruistic qualities that set him apart from his underlings and fellow mobsters. Although it's probably motivated more by pragmatism than a desire to do the right thing, he tries to keep his gang's activities discrete, quiet, and bloodless while minimizing the destructive excesses of his more unruly compatriots. More than anyone else in the family, he's horrified at Richie paralyzing Beansie and the brutal murder of Tracee. However, in Season 3, he begins to compromise what few principles he has by assenting to the rise of Ralph Cifaretto, a depraved mobster whose wanton cruelty completely disgusts him. By the end of the series, he's resigned himself to being evil and given up on maintaining any kind of moral guidelines. The only things that keep him from being utterly monstrous are his loved ones and the fact that his enemies are even more heinous and despicable than him.
No Historical Figures Were Harmed: Tony was based on real-life New Jersey mobster Vincent "Vinny Ocean" Palermo, who later became the DeCavalcante crime family's acting boss before becoming an FBI informant in 2003. Elements of Sam DeCavalcante were also added to Tony Soprano.
Not Helping Your Case: Tony has a bad habit of this. A good example is when Tony and Adriana get into a car accident, the rumor goes around that it happened because Adriana gave Tony a blowjob, Chris is naturally furious and asks Tony if it's true. Instead of just telling Chris the truth and telling him it didn't happen, he just insults him and says he should be happy that Adriana is staying with him. Predictably, this only makes tensions worse.
Not So Above It All: While he frequently berates Christopher over his substance abuse, Tony very occasionally indulges in hard drugs like cocaine and peyote.
Obliviously Evil: He's usually VERY aware that what he's doing is deplorable, but it's nonetheless Discussed in one instance. When asked, Tony doesn't think he or any other mobsters will go to Hell for what they've done, because they're "soldiers", and what they do is just business (as though they were all forced into this lifestyle), and because they follow "codes", it makes them moral (even though they frequently break these codes over the course of the series). While it COULD just be him making excuses for himself and his underlings, like he always does, there's just enough genuineness in how he's saying what he's saying that there's a chance he really believes it.
Old Shame: Although he has the valid excuse of having a panic attack, he expresses regret for allowing Tony B to take the fall and go to prison on a certain night many years ago
Only Sane by Comparison: Played with. He's often clinically labeled as a sociopath by professional psychiatrists and law enforcement, and not for no reason. However, many of his colleagues are even MORE psychopathic, which tends to make Tony appear balanced and rational in comparison.
Papa Wolf: He may not be the most morally upstanding of fathers, but one of his most consistently humanizing features is his sincere love for his children, Meadow and AJ. They may not always get along with their dad, but God help you if you insult, harass or endanger them (to give one example, when Coco drunkenly made vulgar sexual comments about Meadow, Tony beat, pistol-whipped, and curbstomped him). Additionally, one of the most heart-wrenching scenes in the series is Tony's soliloquy in Dr. Melfi's office when he concludes that AJ has inherited his depression.
Parents as People: A major part of the series. Tony is miles better than either of his own parents. He lets Carmela take point and usually listens to her advice, and he gives his kids the time and attention they usually demand - coming to their events, having family dinner, helping them apply for college. He's invested, consistent, and a good provider. But he's also totally incapable of being honest with them for obvious reasons, and his constant lying about what he does inevitably drives big wedges between himself and them.
With his son AJ, a more problematic child who has some of his own most disliked qualities - nerves, uncertainty, panic attacks - he's especially bad, seemingly incapable of simply sitting down and having authentic conversations with him, and usually only giving him attention in relation to discipline or rebuke. He's not very physically affectionate either. And while it's good that he doesn't want him to go into the Mafia, he doesn't seem to have an especially strong vision for him doing anything else. The end result is that AJ lacks the chances to develop the best qualities that would help him, and has no expectation for his father as a source of full-hearted support.
Pay Evil unto Evil: Some of his victims have done nefarious things to him or others, such as Bevilaqua and Ralphie. ZigZagged in that most of these examples occur during moments where the characters are in a vulnerable or quasi-sympathetic position, which makes Tony's retaliation against them sickening.
Peer Pressure Makes You Evil: Shows more morals than his colleagues, but sometimes has to do the wrong thing because it's expected of a ruling mob boss. For instance, he's willing to overlook Vito's homosexuality, mostly due to Vito being a big earner for the family, but is eventually forced to arrange for Vito to be whacked simply because the other mobsters are disgusted by it and demand him to be killed, in particular Phil, who threatens to start a Mob War over the issue (and ultimately beats Tony to the punch).
The Peter Principle: By the end of the series, it becomes clear that Tony is a case of this. While he did well as a captain, where he could micromanage his crew of underlings who were all loyal to him and have Jackie Aprile Sr. rein him in as boss of the family, Tony's pride, temper, and selfishness made him unsuited to be the boss after Jackie's passing, as the position requires maintaining healthy business relationships and putting ego aside for the good of the organization. Since Tony is unable to overcome his personal flaws, he winds up hastening the family's decline.
Pet the Dog: He has a number of humanizing moments with his loved ones, friends and even people he doesn't know very well, all of which keep him from being completely unlikable:
He comforts Christopher when he's freaking over the idea he might go to Hell and is quite gentle as he assures his nephew that noone is mad at him.
A particularly poignant one occurs in "Employee of the Month". When Dr. Melfi is raped and the perpetrator is allowed to go free on a technicality, she feels helpless and betrayed by the political justice system. She seriously considers telling Tony about the attack, enlisting him to exact brutal revenge against the rapist, but ultimately decides against it. At the end of the episode, Melfi breaks into tears during her therapy session with Tony, who gets up from his chair and puts his hand on her shoulder, and asks in the gentlest manner he could manage "what's wrong?". What's notable here is that Tony's strong sexual attraction for Dr. Melfi has been well documented, but there is no hint of lust or other prurient intent here: he's genuinely concerned for her as a human being and a friend and surprisingly tender.
When Tony finds out Ronald Zellman got the African-American cop who issued Tony a ticket demoted and denied overtime (forcing him to get a demeaning part-time customer service job), Tony feels bad and attempts (poorly) to get Zellman to reconsider the decision. It also turns out the cop may be suffering depression similar to Tony’s. Subverted in that, because of an argument with Meadow about racism, Tony allows Zellman to squash the cop's attempts to have a black officers' group to investigate his case, purely out of spite. Finally, Tony, once again out of guilt, tries to give the cop an enormous tip under-the-table at his part-time job, only for him to refuse out of disgust.
While Tony bleeds Davey dry without much remorse he did at least give him fair warning about getting involved at first.
He was genuinely fond of his brother-in-law Tom's father, who often visited the Soprano residence for Christmas, and was shocked by the man's sudden death. He even gives Tom a "boost" to help cover the funeral costs just because of his respect for the man.
In the series finale, he holds the hand of a comatose Silvio to comfort him.
While he's fond of homophobic remarks himself and understands how it goes against their old school "tough guy" principles Tony genuinely doesn't seem to care much when it comes out Vito is gay and was seemingly going to overlook it. While this seemed mostly out of pragmatism of Vito being one of his best money makers as well as gratitude for all the service he'd done for him it also seemed like Tony really just didn't care so long as he kept it to himself. He implies he'd suspected other guys in the past of the same thing but never choose to press the issue.
When Pie-O-My falls ill during the night and Ralphie refuses to help her, Tony rushes to the stables, pays the vet's bill himself, and sits on the hay with her in her stall, petting the animal and reassuring her that everything would be alright.
Tony's soft spot for animals in general tends to be one of his more redeeming qualities and often a source of sympathy for his character. However, it's used as evidence for his sociopathic behaviour near the end of the show, which indirectly results in Dr. Melfi permanently cutting him off.
When Chris gives Adrianna shit for her IBS, Tony later comforts her and expresses that people don't take health issues seriously, if only because he went through similar circumstances in the beginning of the show.
In-between Seasons 5 and 6, he promotes Benny Fazio to soldier after Phil Leotardo brutally assaulted him and fractured his skull, rewarding him for his loyalty and also protecting Benny from future reprisals due to his status.
Tony is genuinely distraught over Tracey's death, being the only person in his crew to be so. Whereas everyone else only angry at Ralph for killing an asset of the crew, Tony is angry at him for murdering an innocent young girl whose life was ahead of her, in large part due to Tracey reminding him of Meadow. This affects him so much that Tony would break Mafia conduct by beating and later murdering Ralph over it.
Artie is one of the very few civilians Tony doesn't hesitate to protect: he burnt down Vesuvio from a well-intentioned desire to not ruin his business, he wiped Artie's debt clean after seeing his Batman Gambit backfire on him, he prevented Benny Fazio from killing him despite Artie attacking a made man at his home, and gave him genuine advice regarding running the restaurant that Artie uses to turn his life around for good. It helps a lot that Artie is one of his very few childhood friends who didn't join the mafia lifestyle.
Phrase Catcher: "He got a lot on his mind" is often said in reference to him, usually after he acts volatile.
Pillow Pistol: In the final season. During the Mob War of 2007, he always carries a carbine rifle with him, to the point of sleeping with it.
Plot Armor: In the episodes "Isabella" and "Members Only", he survives gunfire-at-point-blank-range attempts on his life against all the odds due to being the protagonist of the show.
Politically Incorrect Villain: He has a rather derogatory, disrespectful viewpoint towards pretty much every group that isn't Italian, with ethnic minorities and gays, in particular, being prime targets. He frequently uses slurs quite arbitrarily and disparagingly, even disparages other Caucasians, calling Irish-Americans "Micks" at one point and often using the slur "medigan" for WASP Americans. Interestingly enough, despite referring to African Americans with various racist pejoratives (ditsoon, charcoal briquette, and mulignan), Tony never outright uses the N-word (in contrast to his fellow mobsters who show no hesitation).
Some episodes make it clear that Tony's bigotry is only surface-level at best, given him grudgingly admitting to Melfi that he doesn't really have an issue with what gay people do behind closed doors, in addition to showing genuine guilt towards African Americans at various points in the show. However, this does not preclude Tony from being extremely hateful in many circumstances regardless, and he's still only tolerant by comparison to his far more bigoted underlings. It might be the case that he's socially aware enough that taking any openly liberal viewpoint on such matters would not endear him to his said underlings (whose loyalty to him is often wobbly at the best of times).
Pragmatic Villainy:
A ruthless boss who knows when to avoid a given action for the sake of the business, not out of moral qualms. He is against killing Vito when he's outed as homosexual, if only because Vito is one of his top earners, and feels like it would be a bad financial decision, and angrily refuses to allow Richie to sell cocaine along the trash routes because drug-related crimes are investigated more seriously by the DEA and if law enforcement starts getting into the sanitation unions, it would cripple the criminal organization.
He states that the main reason he keeps AJ away from the criminal side of his life and doesn't groom him to be a successor, despite the importance of family ties in the business, is because he knows that his son simply isn't cut out for a life in the Mafia and probably would not survive. The fact he's aware that the organization's heydays are over and the career's risks outweigh the benefits also plays a part in this.
Properly Paranoid: He is very prone to this, as expected from a mob boss with anxiety and depression. With many of his associates being nabbed by the FBI, he suspects they're keeping an eye on him to try and put him away as well. Not only do the audience see first-hand that the FBI are indeed constantly acting behind the scenes to build a case against him, by the series finale they're finally ready to formally indict him, with the implication that the case they've built is strong enough to put Tony behind bars for the rest of his life.
Psychopathic Man Child: Tony is often shown to have ENORMOUS anger issues and a lack of emotional control, displays a crude and juvenile sense of humor, shows deep-seated insecurity and a need to insult and belittle others, neglects the long-term consequences of his actions, and at times comes across as an overgrown, emotionally immature jock. Even Melfi mentions how childish Tony can be to her therapist.
Melfi "He can be such a little boy sometimes."
Race Fetish: He has a strong preference for women of European, particularly Italian descent, with dark hair and eyes and exotic features. His mistresses have been, in chronological order, of Russian, Italian, Italian/Cuban, and Jewish descent. He favors dark features but also had a few brief flings with blond European women, including a Russian housekeeper and a stewardess from Icelandic Airways. He had one very short encounter with an Asian-American escort during "The Test Dream".
Really Gets Around: Has plenty of mistresses and one-night stands, in spite of the fact that he's not exactly catwalk material.
A Real Man is a Killer: Played with. He's genuinely supportive of Bobby's clean record and admits that this particular Mafia custom is far more hassle than it's worth. However, when Bobby beats him in a fight, he uses this against him and orders him to make his first hit.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Gives these out all the time, especially in later episodes. Characters on the receiving end have included Livia Soprano, Richie Aprile, Jackie Aprile Jr., Jennifer Melfi, Johnny Sack, Artie Bucco, A.J., Janice Soprano, Meadow, and even Carmela.
Tony: (to Feech La Manna) That's another thing. I don't want to hear any more how it was in your day. From now on, keep your antidotes to local color, like Dynaflow or McGuire sisters. Otherwise, SHUT THE FUCK UP!
Redemption Rejection: He seems to become nicer after he wakes up from his coma in season 6... then suddenly becomes far more of a raging dickhead than he ever was before.
Sad Clown: While talking to his therapist, he describes himself as a "Sad Clown": putting on a happy, joking face to his family and friends while keeping his pain locked away. His claims come across more as self-pitying than anything else, given his behavior throughout the series, and his therapist quickly calls out the fact his description doesn't seem accurate at all; Tony far more frequently reacts to misfortunes with rage rather than false happiness.
Sadist: Like his mother, Tony seems to find nothing more amusing than pain and misfortune at others' expense. His schadenfreude tendencies lend to an uglier character trait: his refusal to see anyone else in a happier place than him.
Screw the Rules, I Have Connections!: A given when one is a rich and powerful mobster. He also serves as the invoked connection for other characters.
Secret Identity: A paper-thin one, he is a "waste management consultant" for Barone Sanitation and usually goes by the name of Mr. Spears in the civilian world. It doesn't fool anyone, but legally, he's untouchable... at least, for most of the series.
Selective Obliviousness: Played for Drama. He has extreme difficulty accepting the fact his mother does not love him, she's a horrible human being who only spreads misery wherever she goes, that he harbours deep-rooted feelings of hatred towards her, and being brought up by her is a direct cause of many of his psychological issues, despite overwhelming evidence to all four points, simply due to the fact that she's his mother, and to someone in his lifestyle, the idea of hating their own mother is borderline incomprehensible. He is immediately dismissive and sometimes even enraged whenever Dr. Melfi suggests these possibilities to him. He does come around to the truth a bit after he's presented with undeniable proof she tried to murder him, but goes back to considering himself a terrible son who deserved her treatment after her death.
Seven Deadly Sins: Due to being a mob boss who steadily gets worse throughout the series, Tony eventually commits all seven despite being a Catholic, and even the eighth orthodox sin of Despair.
Pride: Tony's defining sin, as noted by even Silvio. Tony didn't want to give up his cousin Tony B to New York despite him murdering a made man (Billy) due to simply being his cousin, and he could not admit to the mob that he was seeing a therapist in fear of being seen as weak, and the whole thing regarding his panic attack during his and Tony B's robbery which he blamed on being jumped by black guys.
Wrath: Tony has a Hair-Trigger Temper which can flare up at the worst possible times. Several times, he flipped out on Melfi because she pressed his Berserk Buttons, and for more serious examples, he brutally killed Ralph because he suspected that he murdered Pie-o-My, but more immediately because he called him fat to his face. He forced Bobby to kill a civilian because he was slighted by being beaten up by him, and he also killed Christopher because he deemed him useless and was furious that he was high on heroin.
Lust: Tony is a shameless skirt-chaser who simply cannot pass up a chance to cheat on his wife even when it doesn't do him any good, and nearly cost his marriage in Season 4.
Sloth: Despite spending nearly 8 years in regular therapy with Melfi, Tony could not bother to think of changing for the better even for a second and instead spends it getting worse and worse and being more manipulative by using Melfi's advice.
Gluttony: Tony is a Big Eater who grows more and more fat throughout the show, even surpassing Bobby by the beginning of Season 6 despite mocking him and Ginny regarding their weight, as well as his addiction to eating gabagool despite it causing his panic attacks due to his memories regarding Johnny Boy.
Greed: Being a mobster, Tony couldn't even think of leaving the mob life due to the large amount of easy money it gives him and even wanting more as seen with Tony ignoring his own wish to keep Little Italy as is after Julianna eventually raised the price high enough for him to sell Vic Caputo's business to Jamba Juice, and especially with his severe gambling addiction in Season 6B.
Envy: Tony could not see others improving in their lives because he himself couldn't. For example, he sabotages Janice's anger management sessions after seeing her genuinely calm down and attempt to be happy by mocking her about her estranged son Harpo, seeing her lashing out with a smirk.
Despair: Tony, despite a brief Hope Spot where he thought of treating every day as a gift and trying to be better after his Near-Death Experience, all but gives up in Season 6B as he instead gets worse and manipulative, to the point that he actually forgets that he ever advised A.J. to try to remember the good times.
Shame If Something Happened: Tony sometimes verges into threats with veiled language, but after Jackie Jr finally gets on his last nerve, he brings in Ralph for a talk and makes very clear that Jackie needs to go while strongly indicating Ralph can suffer repercussions if he keeps dithering on it.
Sibling Rivalry: He has a troubled relationship with Janice, due to her flighty and impulsive nature, which leads to her constantly relying on him for financial and emotional support. On the other hand, he gets along fine with Barbara, largely due to her normality.
Slowly Slipping Into Evil: Tony was always evil, but he still had some semblance of morality for most of the series. By the time he recovers from his coma and vows to treat every day as a gift, he ends up becoming one of the most morally bankrupt characters in the series. He insults his family behind their backs, becomes a wastrel with gambling, starts acting more aggressive and belligerent towards everyone, and considers killing some of his most loyal men (while actually offing one of them). The fact that he doesn't have any panic attacks after his recovery in the hospital shows that he's becoming more comfortable with who he truly is.
Smarter Than You Look: Make no mistake, despite his outbursts and impulsive decisions, Tony is quite smart and cunning whenever he has to be, a necessary quality for a mob boss managing ruthless criminals.
When Sapinsly refuses to give back the money after Tony cancels the purchase of the Whitecaps home, he smugly points out how Tony can't use violence to take back the money due to being an infamous mob boss. Tony simply disturbs his life without a single blow by playing loud music and orders his men to turn it off whenever Sapinsly calls anyone to complain, leading to him caving in after they are unable to even relax in their own patio without hearing extremely loud music.
When Tony B at first lies about being jumped by black men thus getting a limp, he is at first suspicious that Tony B is lying but says nothing about it. But after learning that Joey Peeps was murdered, Tony S immediately puts two and two together, and then later tells a convincing lie to Johnny Sack to divert his own suspicions after Tony B was spotted not far from the crime scene limping.
The Sociopath: Deconstructed, and ultimately subverted. While he displays some trademarks of sociopathy, including a grandiose sense of entitlement and poor impulse control, he is nevertheless revealed to be capable of experiencing genuine shame and remorse for his crimes as well as making sincere (albeit largely ineffectual) attempts to perform acts of genuine kindness for those outside his immediate family. However, his self-absorbed and covetous nature is entirely consistent with narcissistic personality disorder.
Sore Loser: Tony cannot tolerate losing and gets incredibly petulant about it. When he and Bobby come to blows, Tony initially admits Bobby laid him out fair and square only to later remark "a sucker punch's a sucker punch" and then punishes Bobby by forcing him to do his first hit to drag him down to Tony's level.
Spreading the Misery: One of Tony's worst qualities is that he hates seeing anyone else doing better than him at anything and does whatever he can to drag them down to his level. When his sister Janice actually seems to be quelling her rotten temper, he intentionally goads her into a rage by repeatedly mentioning her estranged son Harpo. When Bobby beats Tony in a fight that Tony started to begin with, Tony decides to punish Bobby by forcing him to go murder an innocent person.
Stout Strength: Tall, stocky, and usually at odds with his weight, Tony is nonetheless quite strong and able to deliver a hell of a beating. He played football in high school and says he used to bench press 300 lbs.
Straw Misogynist: Tony's views and treatment of women are easily one of his biggest prejudices. He embodies a "traditional" patriarchal view that reduces women to either submissive wives, nurturing mothers, or disposable, commodified sexual objects. This is shown is how he refuses to let Carmela be anything other than a housewife, treats all his goomahs horribly, and puts most of the blame for his horrible childhood on Livia, even though Johnny Boy was just as complicit and arguably even more responsible. It ultimately becomes a key contributing factor to Melfi ending the therapy sessions, after Tony rants about Carmela's emotions holding AJ back and thoughtlessly insulting her, Melfi realizes Tony will not change after all these years.
Straw Nihilist: Became this after killing Christopher and spending some time in Las Vegas. And here lies the darkest core of it: Tony doesn’t just inherit Livia’s generational trauma—he internalizes her nihilistic philosophy that “it’s all a big nothing”. The “I GET IT!” in Las Vegas is, at its core, Tony arriving at his mother’s worldview.
Surrounded by Idiots: Especially Paulie and Christopher. A good portion of his problems is generated by sub-par competence or judgement from his underlings.
Survivor Guilt: A Downplayed/non-mortal example in the case of him being saved (via a panic attack) from an incident which led to his cousin Tony B going to prison for years.
Tall Poppy Syndrome: Tony often gets annoyed and, at times, extremely jealous when people around him appear to be happier than he is, and often goes out of his way to take measures to drag them down to his level, making them as miserable as himself, even at times when it is outright detrimental to him. The crowning example being when Janice starts working on controlling her anger issues through anger management classes and actually shows some real progress (something Tony himself hadn't been able to achieve during his years in therapy). He decides to cruelly and smugly bully and antagonize her by repeatedly mentioning her disappeared son Harpo until her resolve finally gives out and she explodes at him.
Tantrum Throwing: Tony is prone to this, a trait later recreated by the boss in Cleaver. Tony is also at the receiving end of a steak when he infuriates Gloria Trillo.
Tin Man: He would like to be The Stoic, admiring the public image of Gary Cooper, "the strong, silent type", but to his chagrin, he's incapable of keeping his feelings and impulses at bay. Rather than looking for a way to find strength within himself, he blames it on several factors: too many therapists, dysfunctions, and excuses for everything and people don't take things in stride anymore.
Too Clever by Half: Tony is a lot smarter than his associates and even received a score of 136 on an I.Q. test when he was a teenager. However, because Tony is aware of his intelligence, he constantly thinks that he knows better than everyone else and makes several poor decisions as a result of his hubris. Junior even calls him out on it on a few occasions.
Junior: Keep thinking you know everything. Some are so far behind in a race that they actually believe they're leading.
Took a Level in Cynic: He was already quite cynical at the start of the show, but by the end he has become so cynical that he forgot the optimistic words he told AJ in the first season, and thought it was a joke.
A.J.: Focus on the good times.
Tony: Don't be sarcastic.
A.J.: Isn't that what you said one time... "Try to remember the times that were good"?
Tony: I did?
A.J.: Yeah.
Tony: Well, it's true, I guess.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Seems to take a new level with each passing season. Reaches its peak in the second half of season 6, where his callousness and selfishness causes some of his long time underlings and associates to turn their backs on him for good.
Trademark Favourite Food: Gabagool (cappocola). It’s his go-to comfort food whenever he’s stressed even if it's what triggers his panic attacks. He also shows a preference towards bialys in later seasons.
Tragic Keepsake:
Tony actively defies it with an artistic picture of Pie-O-My. He gets rid of it because it brings painful memories and gets very angry when he discovers that Paulie rescued it from the garbage and restored it. The picture is finally disposed of for good.
Following the breakdown of his relationship with Livia and her eventual death, Tony seems to adopt some of her attitudes. In a therapy session, he insists that Green Grove is a 'nursing home' rather than a 'retirement community' (he had insisted it was the latter when she was alive), for example.
Tragic Villain: Despite being a hardened criminal, he has a very powerful reason why he's in The Mafia. Tony is emotionally manipulated and terrorized by his difficult mother throughout his childhood and well into his adult life. One notable incident featured his mother threatening to stick a fork in his eye when he was only ten years old. Tony's father was outwardly friendly, but also an abusive and manipulative sociopath who indoctrinated his son into violent crime and the mob. It's implied that the various degrees of emotional manipulation and terror Tony suffered under his parents is what turned him into the violent, savage man that heads the New Jersey crime families.
Tranquil Fury: There are many times Tony is absolutely furious, but covers it up with a placid expression or even a smile. When he finds Jackie Jr with a stripper, he just smiles and says he wants to talk, but he's clearly furious he just caught the guy cheating on Meadow.
Trapped in Villainy: A recurring theme for him; he speaks at length about it to Melfi. He never seriously considers retiring from the mob, feeling that he was born into it and has no other path in life. During Davey Scatino's bust out, he attempts to console his downtrodden friend with the knowledge that when the mobsters have driven his business into bankruptcy, Davey, unlike Tony, will get to walk away and start again. For all that Tony feels welded to the footsteps of his legendary father, however, he does not want the mob life for his own son.
Trauma Conga Line: Despite Tony's tendency to avoid karma, it's easy to overlook that he's dealt with a lot of nasty shit, and deals with even more of it over the course of the series:
His childhood was no picnic, to say the least.
He regularly has to deal with his psychopathic, impulsive, and often downright moronic underlings, as well as his immediate family.
His best friend, Jackie Aprile, dies, and in the ensuing power struggle, his own mother and uncle conspire to have Tony murdered.
He discovers that one of his best friends is an informant and has to kill him.
His mother dies.
He fails to keep his best friend's son (Jackie Junior) out of the criminal life, and Tony has him whacked.
The fiancée of Christopher turns informant, and Tony has to have her killed.
His beloved cousin Tony B antagonizes the Lupertazzi family, and Tony is forced to sacrifice him to appease them.
He is shot by Junior and nearly dies.
His son AJ tries to kill Junior and to commit suicide, failing in both cases. The overall prospects of his children are negative, undesirable, uncertain or both.
His once beloved nephew, Christopher, dies, killed by Tony himself (which, ironically, is a relief for him).
His brother-in-law is killed in a mob war, and his consigliere ends up in a coma.
One of his capos is going to testify against him and is out of reach, with Tony himself unable to do anything about it.
Topping it all off, it's very likely that he is murdered at the very end of the series. If not, then he's indicted and just as likely to be imprisoned due to rock-solid RICO charges against him.
Troll: Tony dips into this from time to time. It's one of numerous signs that he has a child-like mentality.
He tells Matt Bevilaqua to clean up the mess under Silvio's seat during a particularly bad poker game for Silvio, knowing full well that Silvio is in a pretty bad mood and wouldn't like to be interrupted at all.
He gives Dr. Cusamano a useless box full of sand for safekeeping but doesn't tell him what's inside, stoking his curiosity and paranoia over what a mobster would entrust him with.
He often plays simple physical pranks on others. He wakes up Paulie from his slumber during the executive card game, pours cold water on Carmela while she showers, and sprays Tony B's sons with the hose while they're in the pool.
Troubled Sympathetic Bigot: Zig-zagged. Sometimes his racism is used to show what a Jerkass he is, but others it's shown that he mainly resents other races out of a genuine sense of loss for the world he once knew as the changing demographics of his city and America in general have resulted in the loss of much of the places and culture he grew up with.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Downplayed. Carmela isn't exactly in the same league as Tony's goomahs or Adriana, but she keeps a good body, which is more than can be said for Tony to say the least.
Uncertain Doom: His final fate. Either he was shot dead at the diner in front of his family, or he wasn't, but still got convicted and put in prison. It is something very controversial and continues to be so today. While David Chase has obliquely confirmed his death, he refuses to elaborate when or how he died, and what happened immediately after the cut to black at the end of the series finale.
Unexplained Accent: During Tony's Adventures in Comaland under the name of Kevin Finnerty, James Gandolfini used his natural speaking voice over the character's stronger Joisey accent.
Unreliable Expositor: When relaying his life to his therapist he often re-frames events to make himself look more steady, sympathetic, or beleaguered, or even outright lies to remove parts of the story that would involve criminal acts, which is a significant part of why the therapy isn't effective on him. In a more tragic way, the way he talks about his father gives one the initial impression that he was a pretty swell guy who just happened to be saddled with an abusive wife, but it's revealed that his father was just as abusive to him as his mother was, and he was just unable to process it.
Unstoppable Rage: When he's in a bad mood, Tony is brutal in every single way.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: As shown during flashbacks and The Many Saints of Newark, Tony was initially just a normal high schooler who was occasionally unruly before he got roped into the world of organized crime.
Vader Breath: Breathes rapidly through his nose as he grows more agitated (making this a major danger signal), growing to wild boar-like breath when he's fully angered and/or violent.
Villainous BSoD: Every time he has his panic attacks.
Villainous Friendship:
With Jackie Aprile and Salvatore Bonpensiero, a.k.a. Big Pussy. Unfortunately, Jackie dies of cancer in the second episode, and for Big Pussy, his friendship comes after the code of the family, as he finds out when Tony discovers he's a rat and whacks him.
Silvio Dante is the one person in the mob whom he fully confides in, and whose advice and input he values most. His respect for Silvio is evident in several instances where his consigliere makes him see certain truths and change his position on issues. Silvio for his part greatly admires his leader and is one of the few members of the family Tony can always count on for getting the job done and Undying Loyalty.
Villain Protagonist: He's a mafia boss who manipulates, corrupts, terrorizes, and extorts; technically, he's been a villain from the start, but with some redeeming qualities. This is especially noticeable in Season 6, where he becomes exceptionally destructive.
Villainous Valor: No matter how amoral or selfish Tony is and becomes worse as the series progresses, he is not a coward. He always leads his men into fighting others, shows no fear at the prospect of staring down threats such as Richie, Ralphie, or Phil whenever they get in his face.
Vocal Evolution: At the start of the series, his accent is more generically American. His New Jersey accent gets stronger as the series goes on, and he slurs his words much more heavily by the later end.
Wants a Prize for Basic Decency:
It becomes increasingly clear over the course of the series that although Tony says he wants to better himself, what he really wants is to be told he's better without actually doing anything to morally improve. For example, he's angered when he doesn't get some sort of reward for choosing to not cheat on his wife for once, as though it were some immense struggle. This in turn feeds this lack of desire to escape the mob life, since he feels he doesn't get rewarded for being law-abiding, but he does get many rewards for breaking the law (ignoring the countless downsides).
He repeatedly berates A.J., threatens to smack him about, and says he should be happy for not getting kicked out onto the street, but then turns around and says he did the best he could raising his kids, simply because he didn't beat them black and blue with a belt like his own father did with him (and at least once he mentions it's only because the law prevents him from doing anything physical to children).
Wealthy Yacht Owner: He's an amateur yachtsman and has owned two motor yachts over the course of the show — Stugots and Stugots II. The Neapolitan Italian word means "This dick," or in paraphrase "Fuck it."
Weight Woe: He's repeatedly shown being self-conscious about his weight and lack of athleticism, and anyone even alluding to him being fat is one of his quickest Berserk Button areas. However, rather than do anything about it, he copes by making fun of others for being fat with zero self-reflection, and becomes increasingly obese by the series' later seasons.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: Tony has a complicated relationship with his mother Livia. He was indoctrinated with the belief that children should love their parents unconditionally, but his mother is a miserable, selfish sociopath. He tries to look past that fact and take care of her despite the fact she only complains and demeans him whenever they interact, and even gets angry whenever Dr, Melfi suggests Livia doesn't love him and that she's in actuality an awful person. Tony eventually cuts Livia out of his life after she tries to have him murdered, but even after her death, he cries watching a scene from The Public Enemy where Tom's mother joyously prepares for Tom's arrival and blames himself for being a bad son who deserved his mother's treatment, making it obvious he still wishes deeply for her genuine love and tries to rationalize it as something that was obtainable.
Wicked Cultured: One of the most cultured gangsters on the show, along with Patsy Parisi.
Played with, a refined ruffian with some college background who likes to insert learned words, but often mangles them with malapropisms. In another life, from another background, he could have been a very capable military strategist.
While not exactly well read, he maintains an avid knowledge and interest in history, particularly World War II. He is often shown watching programs on The History Channel about great leaders such as George Patton, Erwin Rommel, and Winston Churchill. He reads The Art of War (Sun Tzu), a work which is quoted by several other characters on the show as well, particularly Paulie Gualtieri.
[[Cicero: More is lost by indecision than wrong decision.]]
Woobie, Destroyer of Worlds: Assuming his eventual downfall or assassination, Tony Soprano is probably the biggest example of a this trope in modern television. He actually wants to be a good person, a good father, and a good husband, and he tries hard, even getting flashes where you hope he'll improve, but is incapable of overcoming his own ego, shortsightedness, and Lack of Empathy. There's also the fact that he's, you know, a mob boss.
Would Hit a Girl: A very downplayed example. There are several scenes of him being violent with women, although he usually won't strike them unless they hit him first. And on the rare occasions when he uses physical violence against women, he only blocks punches or shoves. The exception is Carmela. When he's furious with her he'll manhandle her but he won't bring himself to punch her. During an argument, he barely restrains himself by punching holes in the wall next to Carmela.
Would Not Hurt A Child: One of his better qualities, and one of the few virtues he keeps throughout the series, alongside his fondness for animals, Tony loves children immensely, not just his, and would never harm one. Case in point, while not strictly a "child", he considered Tracey basically one, and Ralph killing her makes him go ballistic (with the implication his brutal murder of him later was at least partially motivated by that action). In a seriously twisted example of this, he only decided to off Christopher when he realized his daughter would have been killed in the car accident had she been in the car with them.
You Called Me "X"; It Must Be Serious: When someone calls him "Anthony", it's a sign of something serious. Most of his underlings simply call him T. or Ton., and his close friends/wife usually call him Tony.
Young and in Charge: Young is relative here but in the world of the Mafia Tony, even though he's early middle aged so hardly a kid or even a "young mobster" like Chris, is still unusually young to be the Don of a family at only his early 40s. His fellow Don's in New York and Italy are all at least a decade older than him if not outright old men and some of them judge him for his relative youthful hotheaded attitude at times compared to them. It's partially justified that Tony isn't technically the head of the family, he's supposedly just acting boss for DiMeo who's in jail for life and never actually appears in the series but in practice the show rarely if ever brings it up.