Acquired Situational Narcissism: After getting some positive online comments in regard to his banjo playing in the documentary promos, he decides to quit and become a performer.
Ambiguously Bi: In "Gossip", he's shown to be quite unsure about being straight, to the point of being conflicted on believing or not the false rumor that he was gay, and genuinely unsure about whether he would reject Brad Pitt.
Amusing Injuries:
He rips his scrotum while trying to do a split at the night before Jim and Pam's wedding and landing on his car keys. This is Played for Laughs, of course.
Andy's doing a Parkour high jump right on top of an empty cardboard box.
His bloody nipples during the rabies fundraising race.
Andy trying to break a steel golf club over both of his legs.
Berserk Button: In the earlier seasons, he really doesn't like pranks.
"I need to know who put my calculator in Jell-O, or I'm gonna lose my freaking mind!"
"A lot of people here for some reason think it's funny to steal someone's personal property and hide it from them. Here's a little newsflash! It's not funny! In fact, it's pretty freakin' unfunny! [screams in Angrish and punches a hole in the wall]"
Making light of Cornell University, such as when Dwight showed up wearing a Cornell sweatshirt despite "not being a Cornell man," can really set him off.
Big Bad: In Season 9, thanks to him returning to being an asshole and neglecting his position as manager.
Birds of a Feather: Was this with his Love Interest Erin until season 9. Being both goofy, eccentric, and easygoing, they get along well.
Breakout Character: His role gets bigger and bigger as the series progresses, even resulting in a Promotion to Opening Titles in mid-Season 6.
Butt-Monkey: Jim's cell phone prank, getting marooned on Lake Scranton, tearing his scrotum while dancing, falling neatly into an open box while parkour-ing, getting sunburnt while sailing to the Bahamas his second day on the water, and finally, being made into a meme.
Cannot Spit It Out: With Erin. Though lately, it seems that he's gotten over her.
Characterization Marches On:
After going through Anger Management, he faces some pretty big Villain Decay and goes from an obnoxious Manipulative Bastard to an eccentric yet likable guy.
Seasons three and four imply that, a few screw ups aside, he's mostly a competent employee. By season six, he's consistently said to be the worst salesperson in the office aside from Pam.
Cloudcuckoolander: Even for an Ivy League graduate selling paper in a small Rust Belt city right behind the Poconos he's prone to silliness. Out of everyone in the office, he's the most likely to join Michael and Dwight in their bizarre antics, including their fake Mexican standoff and doing parkour around the business complex. It's why he's the sole Stamford transfer (aside from Jim) to last beyond Season 4.
Competition Freak: Both him and Dwight have this as one of their defining traits, at least until Andy goes through anger management.
Crazy Jealous Guy: He later becomes this towards Erin, making him no different from her previous boyfriend Gabe. After ditching and neglecting Erin for three months when he was in the Bahamas, he becomes possessive of her, going secretly through her cell phone and later trying to fire Pete when he finds out about their relationship.
Decomposite Character: Season 9 puts him on the receiving end of this trope. He wasn't originally based on a UK character, but his explicitly stated incompetence, his new job from Season 8 on, the change in his characterization after he became more confident in Season 9, and his final arc in the series ended up making him even more similar to David Brent than Michael Scott was.
Derailing Love Interests: Bizarrely, despite having earlier put Gabe through this so Andy could end up with Erin, Season 9 pulls this with Andy so that Erin could be paired up with new character Pete instead.
The Dilbert Principle: Was promoted to Regional Manager between Seasons 7 and 8 despite being repeatedly shown to be the worst salesman among the cast. A rare positive example in that he seems to be much more competent as a manager than a salesman (pre-Season 9, anyway).
Failure Knight: He's desperate for power, status and respect. This alienates most people — but when the office discovers that he was neglected by his parents and is desperately trying to get their respect vicariously, they start treating him with more kindness.
Formerly Fat: In "Livin' the Dream: Part 1", Andy mentions he was an overweight child, as he ended up breaking several pool diving boards.
Fratbro: Andy was a former Frat Bro at Cornell and was in an a capella group. He often gives his co-workers silly nick names and even has several of his own ("Nard Dog" being the most common). It seems he was pretty popular at college but not so much in the workplace.
Freudian Excuse: A majority of Andy's Attention Whore behaviour stems from his parents brazenly favouring his younger brother over him.
The Friend Nobody Likes: There are points where he's even less liked than Dwight. Fitting considering that he's just as annoying and bizarre but lacks Dwight's business acumen.
Hate Sink: For most of season three, he's an obnoxious, ass kissing Manipulative Bastard who acts as an antagonist for Jim and Dwight. Once he's sent off to anger management, this aspect of his character is dropped as his Character Development kicks in.
Hidden Depths: Andy seems to be quite knowledgeable about astronomy. Gabe's attempt to sabotage his interview for the manager position by asking Andy how far the Sun is from Earth spectacularly backfires after Andy tells him the exact distance, followed by the Sun's diameter and density compared to that of the Earth's.
Hollywood Tone-Deaf: Throughout the series Andy sings songs clearly not meant for his vocal range, including "Zombie" by the Cranberries, "Stayin' Alive" by The Beegees and "Closing Time" by Semisonic. His singing of "Zombie" is especially notable as it ultimately led Jim to play the prank on him that caused him to have an angry outburst, putting him in anger management and ultimately contributing to his Villain Decay. Although, he actually can sing quite pleasantly- it's even mentioned that it's nice to hear him sing in a proper context when he appears in Sweeney Todd.
Hot-Blooded: Until he goes to anger management. Though, once he gets pushed over the edge, his anger issues resurface.
Hypocritical Humor: Andy tells Oscar that he will use his breakup with the Senator as inspiration for sad scenes, which causes Oscar to ask why Andy doesn't use his own breakup with Erin as inspiration. Andy then criticizes Oscar for bringing up such a painful memory.
Iconic Sequel Character: It's easy to forget that he doesn't appear until season 3, since he quickly becomes a fairly prominent character since his introduction, even replacing Michael as regional manager after he leaves.
I Minored in Tropology: While his major at Cornell was Economics, fitting for a salesman, he minored in Women's Studies.
Irony: After spending most of the back-half of Season 9 making pathetic attempts to break into show business, "Finale" reveals that he became a popular Breakout Character in the In-Universe documentary, meaning he didn't even need to bother with the commercials and student films and America's Next A Capella Sensation.
It's All About Me: Pre-anger management and much of Season 9.
Ivy League for Everyone: He went to Cornell and makes a point of mentioning it constantly, though, as one of the less-famous schools in the league, this might not impress people as much as he thinks.
I Was Beaten by a Girl: By a little girl no less in "Test The Store". He attempts to obscure the detail about his black eye...until the mother comes by forcing her daughter to apologize. He later gets another black eye after Kelly accidentally punches him. Toby is sympathetic, heavily implying he was abused by his ex wife.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He was initially a Manipulative Bastard, but after going to Anger Management he Took a Level in Kindness. Come Season 9, with Andy getting accustomed to being the new boss, Andy Took a Level in Jerkass again.
Manipulative Bastard: Initially. At least successfully around Michael, when he makes him believe that Dwight is untrustworthy and convinces him to fire him.
Mean Boss: In season 9, he doesn't treat his subordinates very well, especially Nellie, and later Erin and Pete, after he comes back from his boat trip. He also felt zero guilt over accepting a bonus paycheck when the branch turned a higher profit during the time he was out at sea.
Memetic Mutation: Becomes a rather unflattering one in-universe. By the events of "Finale", he's made peace with it, and even managed to make it work for him a bit.
The Nicknamer: Consistently calls Jim "Big Tuna" (or simply "Tuna") after seeing him eat a tuna sandwich on his first day at Stamford. He also called Ryan "Big Turkey", presumably for the same reason. He called Pam "Pama-lama-ding-dong" when he flirted with her (a name Michael had also used). In season 9, he calls Pete "Plop", because he supposedly defecates a lot.
He also was the recipient of a bunch of Frat Bro nicknames at Cornell that he proudly uses. "Nard Dog" is the most famous, but there were also names like "Boner Champ", "Puke", "Ace", "Buzz" and "King Butt".
Odd Friendship: With Darryl.
Pointy-Haired Boss: After he gets promoted to regional manager. When he first took over, he was actually shown to be a bumbling but decent boss who the others liked working with, but in season 9 his entire character took a sharp turn. He terminates a major account on a technicality and the office works better during the three months he's not there.
Professional Butt-Kisser: In season 3, he rivals Dwight to become Michael's Number Two, and he's an even more shameless sycophant than Dwight.
Promotion to Opening Titles: In mid-Season 6, thanks to the trope below and Ed Helms having a starring role in a blockbuster comedy.
Relationship Revolving Door: With Erin. They ultimately break up permanently in the final season.
The Rival: To Dwight. Initially they are very hostile to each other, but after Andy's Character Development, it becomes more of a Friendly Rivalry, at least when they are not interested in the same woman.
Small Name, Big Ego: At first. After going to anger management, his confidence drops to practically nil. He becomes too overconfident again towards the end of the show, after he receives a compliment about his musical talent and immedietely quits his job to become famous.
Stalker with a Crush:
To Angela, in season 4. Even if she's not interested at first, he keeps insisting to make her change her mind, giving her presents and trying to Serenade Your Lover. He also says things like "All night dreaming about Angela's smoking hot body", and does things like scratching her back as an excuse to touch her (because she said her back was itchy). He would also be a case of Abhorrent Admirer, but eventually convinces her to date him.
To Erin, even when he's dating Jessica in season 8. When he sees Erin getting into Robert's car after a party, he follows them. He eventually even follows her to Florida to win her back.
Erin: Wow. Andy is such a weird stalker. Following me home like that when he has a girlfriend? I should get a restraining order. [squeaks]
Stalker Without a Crush: In season 3, he constantly pesters Michael to get his approval, to the point that even Michael eventually finds him creepy and needs to hide behind a door to avoid him.
Teeny Weenie: According to Meredith in "Sex Ed" and "Search Committee".
Took a Level in Jerkass: In the final season. Managed to get his Kindness back by the time "Finale" rolls around.
Took a Level in Kindness: He starts off as one of the biggest jerks in the cast before he is sent to anger management. Thankfully, his time there teaches him how to keep his temper under control and be a better person to others. Once he returns, he's one of the nicest characters.
Two First Names: His first and last name can both be used as a given name for a male.
The Un-Favorite: Especially evident when Andy's parents and little brother attend his garden party. Foreshadowed way before that when he explains that he was originally named Walter Jr. but was renamed Andrew because his younger brother "fit the name better".
Upper-Class Twit: A rare American example.
Verbal Tic: Tends to drop into a posh English accent and faux-Shakespearean dialogue whenever he's feeling confident, e.g. addressing woman as "Milady." At one point he greets Pam and Jim with "Milady. Mi-tuna."
"Well Done, Son" Guy: Really wanted to impress his family with being new manager of Dunder-Mifflin in a garden party. He doesn't get it from his father. He seems to get over this when his father single-handedly ruined the Bernard family in a single night and left him to pick up the pieces, leaving Andy with zero concern with his father or what he thinks. Unfortunately, this also added to Andy's season-wide descent into a Jerkass, making it debatable as to whether this really was good for him.
White Anglo-Saxon Protestant: Is a trust-fund baby from a wealthy New England family.
Yes-Man: At first. After anger management, his friendliness with Michael becomes more due to being a genuine nice guy than this trope.
You Are in Command Now: Andy's the new official manager of Dunder-Mifflin in the show's final two seasons.