Affectionate Nickname: Called "monkey" by Dwight.
Alpha Bitch: She's probably (and openly) the meanest of the office and she was during a time as head of the Party Committee, spending her time to insult and be bossy with other members, especially Phyllis.
Animal Motifs: She's strongly associated with cats. Like a cat, she's an antisocial and aggressive character, but with a far softer side for those she trusts.
Babies Ever After: By the series finale, she has a son, Philip, with Dwight.
Berserk Button: Whatever you do, do NOT make fun of her height, or call Dwight a freak in front of her.
Better with Non-Human Company: Angela is genuinely compassionate, loving and affectionate with her beloved cats. She's far more rude, aggressive and antisocial with human company.
Birds of a Feather: Dwight and Angela are both very quirky, overly serious, and obnoxious egomaniacs who love being controlling of others.
Break the Haughty: Much of season nine has been this for her, from finding out about Oscar and her husband to moving into a squalid studio apartment and losing her cats. Things end happily for a noticeably sweeter Angela with her marriage to Dwight.
Character Development: Greatly accelerated in the final season. Between the season Humiliation Conga and the Time Skip of the last episode, Angela goes from a bitchy, bigoted, arrogant shrew incapable of maintaining any sort of healthy relationship through most of the show to a much more tolerant and open minded Happily Married woman.
Cluster F-Bomb: Has dropped a couple of these when the Schrute men scare her.
Angela (after Dwight nearly runs her off the road): WHAT THE FUCK IS YOUR PROBLEM?!
Angela (after Mose releases her from his trunk): WHAT THE FUCK IS YOUR PROBLEM, YOU FUCKING ASSHOLE?!
Control Freak: Particularly when it involves the Party Planning Committee.
Crazy Cat Lady: It's heartbreaking to learn she loses most of her cats when you remember how much love she's expressed towards them. Unusually for this type of character, her marriage actually contributes to this, since a lot of the wedding gifts she receives are cats.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Big time in "Finale", to the point where she seems to have become a completely different character. Coupled with the Humiliation Conga of the Robert Lipton relationship, it seems likely that seeing her past hypocrisy in the documentary (which, judging from the Danish promo in "Promos", used her sexual dalliances as a noteworthy subplot) led her to a Heel Realization during the year-long gap before "Finale".
Dude Magnet: She's quite attractive, and while her Holier than Thou personality might be a turn-off for most men, she's still appealing enough to have had two different pairs of men fight in a literal duel for her affections. Roy also doesn't hesitate to choose "that tight-ass Christian chick, the blonde" when the employees play "Who'd You Do?" in "The Fire", even though Pam is standing right next to him.
Evil Is Petty: Frequently engages in rude, disrespectful, or outright cruel behavior for no good reason.
She hasn't spoken to her sister, whom she says was her best friend, in sixteen years over an argument she can't even remember. And she's extremely proud of that. This is gone by the finale, where we find out she chose a Latino homosexual with whom her now ex-husband slept with as godfather of her child.
Despite Pam being her loyal Secret-Keeper while she was seeing Dwight, she seems to go out of her way to insult Pam. This is especially obvious in "Dinner Party" where she tells Jan that Pam has been ogling Michael, which is a total lie and she has no reason to say it other than to be a jerk. She also refers to Pam as the "office mattress" at one point- despite the fact that she has been with more men than Pam (and even cheated on both of her fiancés with Dwight).
The Friend Nobody Likes: Due to her rude and harsh behavior. After Devon gets fired from Dunder-Mifflin, Angela is one of the very few peoplenote  he doesn't invite to join him for a goodbye drink. In the episode where there are two competing Christmas parties (one hosted by Angela, the other hosted by Pam and Karen), most people decide to go to Pam and Karen's party, except Kevin and Phyllis. And Kevin goes to Angela's party just because there are brownies, even if he doesn't like Angela's presence and eventually Angela irritates him enough to make him go to the other party.
The Fundamentalist: She seems to be something of a conservative Christian who despite her professed faith acts very un-Christian, namely passing judgement on nearly everyone she meets.
Glurge Addict: Angela gets into a huge fight with Oscar over whether or not she can put up a glurgey poster of babies dressed up like jazz musicians on her cubicle wall.
Happily Married: With Dwight at the end.
Height Angst: She's a little insecure about her height. At 5'1", she is the shortest member of the office staff and laments that she still shops in the junior section and, on occasion, will wear doll clothing. She mentions that Dwight would exercise by strapping her into a Baby Bjorn and doing lunges across his farm.
Hidden Depths:
Her extreme bitchiness and high-maintenance-ness notwithstanding, she does have an understanding about the class a Proper Lady needs to have. When Dwight demands that she just hose his dirty aunt (said aunt also wants that) for her bath, she silences both of them, promising that she would treat the aunt like a lady she is. Later it is shown that she carefully braids Dwight's aunt, who is now properly bathed and dressed.
For such a humorless woman, she's suprisingly good at comedy when she puts her mind to it. She gives an impressive set at Micheal's roast, wins Pam's caption contest and intially charms Lipton with her jokes.
Holier than Thou: Believes herself to be morally superior to the others (in reality she is anything but).
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: Dwight is 6"3" and she is 5"1".
Humiliation Conga: In the final season, Angela learns her husband is not just gay, but cheating on her with her co-worker and frenemy, Oscar, and they separate. Without the Senator's money, she is forced to move into a studio apartment with her young son. Then, after a neighbor complains, two "sackfuls" of cats are taken from her, she is evicted from her studio apartment, and she has roughly $25 in her bank account.
Hypocrite: Practically her defining trait. She's capable being incredibly judgmental towards anyone but herself, it seems.
In many talking head interviews, she refers to Jan and even Pam as "whores", often for no other reason than wearing clothing that Angela has decided is inappropriate. Clothing that is often less revealing than attire that Angela herself has worn.
She put out a hit on her husband's lover- despite the fact that she repeatedly cheated on both her fiancés with little to no hesitation, and even had some indiscretions during her marriage (one of which led to her getting pregnant). This, from The Fundamentalist. Even Dwight calls her out on it.
In keeping with both the above, she at one point refers to Pam as "the office mattress". Pam, it should be noted, is only ever in two relationships throughout the course of the series (albeit both with other employees of the office), both of which she is wholly committed to while in them, and one of which ends up in a happy marriage with kids. Angela, however... well, see above regarding infidelity and various love triangles she's gotten herself into.
Introverted Cat Person: She isn't a very sociable person, but clearly loves cats.
Ironic Name: In spite of her name, Angela is one of the most abrasive and unpleasant people in the office.
Irony: After all her open despising of homosexuals, she ends up unwittingly marrying one, and after the divorce and subsequent disgrace she ends up living with Oscar. For a Literal Metaphor bonus, she lives in his closet, which he lampshades. This is a huge part of the reason she breaks out of her ice queen bigot personality.
Jerkass: She's cold, snide, condescending, judgmental, purposefully difficult and hypocritical. And it's only fairly late into the series that she starts gaining any kind of meaningful character improvement.
Jerkass Has a Point: Pettiness aside, she is often right about stuff Michael does, like how Movie Monday might get them into trouble with Jan (it does) and how inappropriate Kama Sutra was for the workplace, or her frustration with Phyllis failing to complete simple tasks for one of the Christmas parties.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She's perpetually sour and confrontational, but this doesn't mean she lacks humanity and empathy. When she sees how horribly Dwight treats his elderly aunt, she is horrified and tells him off before giving the aunt a proper bath and making sure the woman is properly dressed.
Lady Macbeth: Towards Dwight during "The Coup"
Mean Character, Nice Actor: Compare close-minded and bigoted Angela Martin with pleasant and worldly Angela Kinsey who lived in Indonesia for 12 years.
Meaningful Name: Her first and middle names have Christian themes (Angela comes from "angel" and Noelle from "noel," French for Christmas), and her last name is the name of a saint - echoing her Catholicism.
The Napoleon: She is quite insecure about being short. Michael's jokes don't help.
Never My Fault: She's very reluctant to admit her mistakes, insisting that they're someone else's fault (usually Kevin).
No Sense of Humour: Angela has little sense of humor and almost never smiles or expresses happiness.
Not So Above It All:
On the trip to the beach, she is the first to start singing along with Kevin to The Gambler and enthusiastically joins in on The Flintstones theme.
She's the one to come up with an insulting caption for a picture of two dogs on an island that most of the office thought was hilarious in "The Search". Her inspiration was wanting one of the dogs to pee on Gabe.
Perpetual Frowner: Though on occasion she does smile - mostly when it involves Dwight.
Pet the Dog: She has her moments that show she's not completely heartless.
Her relationships with her cats is a literal one.
She comforts Kevin when he is undergoing testing for skin cancer and bluntly tells Michael that Kevin's test is more important that his birthday.
Asking Oscar to be part of the Party Planning Committee, and telling him it's not because he's gay.
Reassuring Kelly with a pat on the hand and rare smile when Ryan was taken under Dwight's wing.
Invites Pam to go out for coffee with her after Dwight hand-delivered her forgotten tax forms to Corporate.
In "The Accountants" webisodes, she pays off Michael's electricity bill through his checking account when it's about to get shut off.
Relationship Revolving Door: With Dwight.
Sex Goddess: According to Dwight, she's actually terrific in bed. He attributes it to how her craziness making her enthusiastic and her flexibility.
She Cleans Up Nicely: She looks very nice in her sexy nurse costume in one Halloween episode. Giving birth also had no negative effect on her petite body, much to Pam's chagrin.
Smug Snake: Known for her haughty, holier-than-thou attitude, alongside being humorless.
Sour Prudes: Despite being self-righteous, she has an affair with Dwight while engaged to Andy, making her a full-fledged Straw Hypocrite.
Strange Minds Think Alike: She and Dwight.
Tiny Tyrannical Girl: This girl meets the two other criteria with admirable gusto: fun-sized stature with supersized agressiveness.
Took a Level in Kindness: From Season 2 and after she slowly develops into a more open-minded, nicer person, but it really hits after her Trauma Conga Line.
Tsundere: To Dwight, though he's arguably more of one to her.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: Back and forth with Dwight.
What Does He See in Her?: She jealously tries to invoke this with Dwight, insisting that the wholesomely beautiful Esther is ugly.
When She Smiles: On the rare occasion she lets out a genuine smile, it can light up a room (or at least her corner of it).
You Are Fat: She makes passive aggressive comments about Pam's weight when they are both pregnant in season 8 (and after their pregnancies as well).