Absence Makes the Heart Go Yonder: Falls for Pete while Andy is on his lengthy boat trip.
Beware the Nice Ones: Upon realizing Andy was engaged to Angela she goes nuts and ends up chucking a cake at him!
Birds of a Feather: Was this with her longest-lasting Love Interest Andy until season 9. Being both goofy, eccentric, and easygoing, they get along well.
Brainless Beauty: A mild version mixed with The Pollyanna - she's very pretty and probably the nicest person in the show but she can be completely clueless, gullible and naive.
Break the Cutie: In "Secretary's Day." So apparently you can pretend to fire her, make fun of her behind her back, and smuggle a flock of geese into her car, but tell her that her boyfriend used to date another co-worker and you're Deader Than Dead.
Cannot Spit It Out: Struggled to express her affection for Andy at first, though it eventually worked out.
Characterization Marches On: In Seasons 5 and 6 she was just a friendly, sweet-natured, somewhat shy but down-to-Earth secretary struggling to fit into the craziness of the office. There was little hint of the eccentricity and dimwittedness that would come to define her character. By Season 7 her eccentricity and dimwittedness became her defining character traits, and by Season 8 and 9 she has become noticeably more assertive and competitive. The latter also happened to coincide with her becoming a redhead.
Clingy Jealous Girl: For Michael in the "Father/Daughter" way. Later towards Andy when he starts dating Jessica.
Cloudcuckoolander: She grew up in various orphanages and hospitals before getting her receptionist job. For example, she throws away disposable cameras after using up the film roll lamenting that she will never get to see the pictures she took.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: Takes over from Pam in watching over Michael. Erin actually does a better job of it sometimes because rather than trying to outright stop Michael's zaniness or encouraging it for her own amusement (like Pam did), Erin would let Michael have his eccentricities (because she's not too far removed from them herself) and only worked to guide Michael to do the right thing according to what they collectively think produces the greatest happiness towards everyone.
Cordon Bleugh Chef: She reuses hot dog water to make them more flavourful and makes tea by boiling gatorade.
The Cutie: She's not just cute but also extremely naive and innocent.
The Ditz: Perhaps to a greater extent than Kelly as she lacks the occasional flashes of manipulative cunning Kelly shows.
Does This Remind You of Anything?: Her meeting Holly is treated like a child meeting a parent's new partner.
Dude Magnet: Attracts Andy, Dwight, Gabe, Pete, Clark, Ryan, Kevin, and her foster brother Reed.
Dumb, but Diligent: Erin is a ditzy but lovable girl who has a love for her job as the receptionist that Pam could never fake. Just signing for a shipment of pens she takes as Serious Business.
Extreme Doormat: To Gabe. While he isn't necessarily abusive, he tends to steamroll aspects of their relationship, such as forcing her to watch horror movies despite her dislike of them. Her reluctance to stand up to him is in part due to him being her superior in the company, and she even states that if he wasn't her boss then she never would have considered him romantically. Towards the end of their relationship she's actively avoiding him and openly states she dislikes being with him, and it still takes Pam's encouragement to give her the confidence to actually leave him.
Friendly Scheming: Is ecstatic when Darryl chooses her to help him in his occasional schemes. Perhaps a little too much.
Genius Ditz: Like Kevin, she has her moments.
Genki Girl: She's very cheerful.
Hilariously Abusive Childhood: Sometimes it's played straight, but for the most part it's just sad, mostly due to her upbringing as an orphan/foster child.
Horrible Judge of Character: When they started dating, she thought that Gabe was a great guy. Boy was she wrong.
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: Apparent when she's dating Gabe - she's not very tall anyway, but everyone is dwarfed by Gabe.
Hypocrite: In "The Boat", she at one point mentions to Pete that Andy is 'seriously juvenile', after several seasons of fitting that description to a tee herself.
Iconic Sequel Character: She becomes a major character, but doesn't appear until late of Season 5, five episodes before the series' halfway point.
Incest Subtext: In "St. Patrick's Day" she is shown to be a little too close to her foster brother Reed while still resisting his advances.
The Ingenue: She's a real sweetheart but she's woefully clueless and a Wide-Eyed Idealist.
Jerkass to One: To Holly, who she takes an immediate dislike to due to her protective feelings for Michael, and her fear that she might upset him again. Notably, however, she's somewhat unimpressed by her before even knowing who she is as she doesn't think she lives up to the image Michael painted of her.
Karmic Jackpot: Ends the series in a fulfilling relationship, in a job she loves surrounded by friends, and reuniting with her birth parents.
Kindhearted Simpleton: She means well (usually), and is sweet and innocent but not very bright.
Like A Daughter to Me: Develops this relationship with Michael. It's clear from the outset that she sees him as a father figure, but he's initially a little off-put by her personality. They gradually grow closer, and when he finally realizes she sees him as a Parental Substitute he's quick to play along, treating her as a surrogate daughter from that point on.
Love Triangle: In one with Andy and Pete in the final season.
Manic Pixie Dream Girl: Has all the qualities of one, mixed with being a Genki Girl.
Middle Name Basis: Her first name is Kelly. But since they already had a Kelly, they call her Erin instead. She explained in the episode she was introduced that everyone calls her Erin anyway.
Morality Pet: For Michael.
Naïve Newcomer: In season 5.
Nice Girl: Cheerful, friendly, and probably the kindest character on the show.
Oblivious to Love: To her foster brother Reed.
The Ophelia: A comedic example - she's usually lovely, kind, and quirky but get on her bad side and you'll regret it.
Parental Substitute: Michael is this for her. She's clearly crushed when he makes it clear he isn't her father, and him seeing how upset he is and realizing how much she cares about him is what prompts him to treat her as the daughter he never had.
The Pollyanna: Despite her hardships she's still a positive, energetic, and kind person.
Promoted to Love Interest: Ellie Kemper was originally signed on to do one or two episodes as Erin Hannon. However, as the popularity of her character increased, she was (thankfully) worked into the script as Andy's love interest.
Psycho Ex-Girlfriend: She veers dangerously close to this in Season 8, especially in her attitude towards Andy's new girlfriend Jessica.
Relationship Revolving Door: With Andy. They ultimately break up permanently in the final season.
Rules Lawyer: A recurring source of comedy is Erin's refusal to break, or even bend, the rules. In an early episode she refuses to put out the candy Pam and Jim brought back from their honeymoon, and not knowing exactly what to do when receiving a shipment of pens is enough to seriously upset her. Once Dwight takes over as manager in Series 9 she not only follows his strict security rules to the letter, she'll happily blast people with steam if they get the password wrong - even if the person doing so is Dwight, who created the password in the first place.
Sanity Ball: Grabs this hard in Lice, being the one to take charge when it comes to clearing the infestation, and doing so more rationally than Dwight, who manages to bug bomb himself twice, and Meredith, who immediately resorts to shaving her head.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: She's a Genki Girl and has dynamic with some of her boyfriends, like the uptight Gabe or the level-headed Pete. Averted in her relationship with Andy, as he's an emotional Cloudcuckoolander like her.
Serious Business: Occasionally treats her job as this, to the point where she grows increasingly concerned about taking a delivery of pens due to not knowing where to put them when they arrive.
Sexy Secretary: Like Pam before her, a receptionist that made many co-workers be smitten by her.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: This is ultimately why she decides to leave Andy for Pete.
Sympathetic Adulterer: In early season 9, she clearly loves Andy and is genuinely supportive of him. When Andy's parents go bankrupt, she only wants to cheer him up. Only after Andy goes on a boat trip, leaves her behind, and barely communicates with her for three months, she starts falling for Pete.
Think Happy Thoughts: How she gets through negative parts of her life and encourages others to do the same.
Took a Level in Dumbass: Around season 7. She goes from a cheerful and optimistic Naïve Everygirl to a completely clueless and dimwitted Brainless Beauty.
Tuckerization: She's named after writer's assistant Kelly Hannon, who would also write some of the webisodes.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: With Andy.
Unwanted Assistance: Has a serious problem with this in-universe. In one cold opening, Andy asks Erin to claim that he has an important phone call so he can ignore it to make himself look better to a client. Erin takes this to mean that she should make up a story about his mother dying, while ignoring all of Andy's attempts to get her to stop. At the end of Season 8, when Andy is trying to make himself look pathetic to make his return to the Regional Manager position more dramatic, Erin "contributes" by claiming that Andy is abusing her.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Always has a positive and optimistic attitude in contrast to the other characters.