Adaptational Personality Change: Her UK counterpart was a patient, down-to-earth professional and not the least bit quirky. Jan gradually goes crazy, and by the time she's let go from Dunder Mifflin, it's said that she barely does any work at all anymore.
Ambiguously Jewish: Jan's maiden name, Levinson, is an Ashkenazi Jewish surname and her married name, Gould, can also be a Jewish surname. However, neither her faith nor her ethnicity is ever explicitly mentioned within the show.
Broken Bird: One reading of the character (which Melora Hardin herself has endorsed) is that the frustrations of being a woman trying to get ahead in the male-dominated corporate world (plus a bitter divorce) completely broke Jan's spirit, which is why she goes from cold and demanding to flighty. In "Boys and Girls", Kelly, of all people, seems to recognize this.
Kelly: How can someone so beautiful be so sad?
Buxom Beauty Standard: Two of Michaels's "cons" about Jan were that her chest was "nothing to write home about" and that she was lacking in "chesticles." Jan is well aware of this and gets a boob job and starts wearing low-cut tops in an attempt to win him back and it actually works, at least for a little while.
Michael: [To Pam after she had told him not to get back together with Jan.] You made a good argument. Hers was bigger.
Characterization Marches On: Was at first a very professional, overworked and impatient superior who was forced to put up with Michael's advances, but soon transformed into a shrill, abusive nightmare, and then finally going completely insane, going hippie and singing sexually provocative songs to her infant in the office.
Clingy Jealous Girl: She accused Pam of having eyes for Michael three separate times (Michael's claim that he and Pam HAD dated didn't exactly help matters any). Furthermore, even after breaking up with Michael once and for all, she still tried to tell him not to date Holly after taking an immediate dislike to her (Michael ignores her "advice" and immediately hugs Holly warmly and asks her out. D'awww!).
Cloudcuckoolander: In her last appearances.
Did They or Didn't They?: With Michael in "The Client".
The Dilbert Principle: During the first three seasons, she serves as Dunder-Mifflin's Vice President of Sales. But as shown in "The Client", she herself is not a very effective saleswoman as she continually derails her and Michael's meeting with the county government by being too impersonal and focused on numbers.
Double Standard: Abuse, Female on Male: Averted. When the abusive nature of the relationship is first brought up in "Women's Appreciation Day", the women present immediately notice how disturbing it is and try to motivate Michael into breaking up. "Dinner Party" flat-out deconstructs this trope, as Michael himself is the only one who seems to be okay with her behavior, while everyone else at the party is either uncomfortable or outright disturbed.
Drop-In Character: A downplayed version in the first three seasons, because she was very stern and caused Michael to go off the rails trying to impress her. Odd how often she showed up in Scranton, with New York a two and a half hour drive away. Later played straight, when David Wallace cites the amount of time she spends in Scranton as one of several reasons for her firing.
Hollywood Mid-Life Crisis: She starts the show as a corporate exec who's a consummate professional, but as she approaches middle age after getting a divorce she gradually becomes more impulsive, often at the expense of her good judgment. She apparently had a Mrs. Robinson fling with her young assistant, then got into a relationship with Michael even though she acknowledged that he was a poor fit for her. After she got fired from Dunder Mifflin, rather than pursue another job that would fit her qualifications, she decides to become a candle maker!
How the Mighty Have Fallen: She went from the Vice President of Dunder Mifflin's Sales Division to being a borderline alcoholic squatting jobless in Michael's condo before starting up a failing candle business. She gradually bounced back with her own business, but given the way she mistreats her secretary it's implied she'll eventually lose it all once again because she never owned up to her mistakes.
Hypocrite: Breaks up with her husband due to him not wanting children, then rejects the idea of Michael and her having kids. And then she has a child.
Hypocrite Has a Point: Yes, she did drive Michael into debt with her failed candle business and condo renovations, but she wasn't wrong when she pointed out Michael is Money Dumb.
I Have Boobs, You Must Obey!: Got implants to get Michael to get back together with her. Michael is obvious about how effective this trope is on him.
Karma Houdini: In real life, after it's revealed in "Women's Appreciation" that she basically rapes Michael, films their sex without his consent and passes on the videos to her counsellor, both her and the counsellor would be looking at steep prison sentences.
Mrs. Robinson: It's implied that she had an affair with her teenage assistant Hunter (and took his virginity) and when she returns in season 9 as a client Dwight brings in Clark, the new 23 year old Dunder Mifflin employee as a bribe for her in exchange for her business.
Ms. Fanservice: After she gets her boob job, she starts wearing really low-cut tops, and makes an effort to show her new... "assets" off, particularly when she can get something from Michael.
Never My Fault:
She drained Michael's bank account to set up her failed candle business and to make pointless renovations to his condo. After Michael went into debt because of her, she accused him of being unable to manage his finances. (Granted, Michael did make some questionable financial decisions of his own, such as buying, among other junk, "multiple magic sets [and] professional bass fishing equipment," according to Oscar's audit of Michael's finances. But still!)
In "The Client" she accuses Michael first of getting her drunk, and then spiking her drinks in order to sleep with her despite the fact that she was the first to order alcohol, then continued drinking when Michael derailed her sales strategy with his more personal (and much more effective) sales style.
When she gets fired from Dunder-Mifflin, she accuses David of being prejudiced against her (and hating her boob job), despite David listing out the multiple legitimate reasons why she's become The Load and needed to be made redundant. She ends up filing a deposition against the company in an attempt to file an unlawful termination, which fails largely due to Michael deciding to stand by the company instead of her.
Pet the Dog: Jan gets the occasional humanizing moment, like her When She Smiles reaction after Michael closes the deal in "The Client", or when she talks Michael out of running away in "Money".
Plastic Bitch: She got a boob job to better manipulate her ex Michael.
Sanity Slippage: She was originally a very professional woman but starting in Season 3 she started to become more and more paranoid and unstable and she completely went off the deep end after David Wallace fired her. Her relationship with Michael also deteriorated as she became abusive and possessive towards him awfully until they broke up.
Straight Man: Until she seemingly had a complete mental breakdown and became worse than Michael.
There Are No Therapists: Double subverted. She has a therapist she mentions seeing often, however, it's not working and it's implied said therapist is not very good, having told Jan to embrace her self destructive tendencies and watches the videos she makes of herself having sex with Michael (much to Michael's chagrin). Melora Hardin believes the therapist's terrible advice was the biggest catalyst in Jan's shift from a reasonable put-together woman to an emotionally unstable wreck.
Woman Scorned: It's hinted that her behavior in early Season 3, culminating in the (brief) closing of the Scranton branch, is revenge for Michael rejecting her in "Casino Night."
Women Are Wiser: In her early appearances, she's a very serious and professional woman who has to put up with Michael's immaturity. Subverted after her Sanity Slippage.