Alliterative Name: Kelly Kapoor
Attention Whore: As her New Year's resolution puts it: "Get more attention by any means necessary."
Big Ego, Hidden Depths: Downplayed; it is occasionally hinted that underneath her narcissistic preening she's actually quite lonely and starved of affection in her life, but it's not really explored in that much depth.
Birds of a Feather: A dysfunctional example with Ryan. They start off as Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl, but as the show goes on, it becomes clear that their relationship is The Masochism Tango because they are both vain, selfish, superficial, and immature manipulators.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: On the surface, she seems to be a cheery, friendly girl. In truth, she's a petty, bratty Womanchild who ultimately only cares about herself.
Characterization Marches On: Her character changes completely after the first season, initially a very modestly dressed, quiet professional, she then was retconned into a squeeky voiced bratty child obsessed with teenage culture. Mindy Kaling explained that in her first episode she was a new hire eager to make a good first impression, but by the time she got comfortable in the office just let her real self come out.
Clingy Jealous Girl: When it comes to Ryan.
Disproportionate Retribution: Sabotages Jim and Dwight's customer reviews, which affect their bonuses, because they no-showed one of her parties.
The Ditz: A ditzy, pop-culture-obsessed chatterbox.
Dude Magnet: She attracts Ryan, Darryl, and Ravi, and has relationships with all three. Also, during the Michael roast in "Stress Relief", when she claims that she would rather make out with Kevin or anybody from the warehouse, both Kevin and the warehouse workers cheer.
Embarrassing Middle Name: Rajnigandha. She apparently hates it.
False Rape Accusation: "Customer Survey" reveals that whenever she gets in trouble at work, she lies about being raped to garner sympathy and avoid punishment.
Michael: You cannot say "I was raped" and expect all of your problems to go away, Kelly. Not again.
Feigning Intelligence: After attending a Minority Executive Training course she returns trying to dress and sound "smarter".
Kelly: You could ask me, 'Kelly, what's the biggest company in the world?' and I'd be like, "blah blah blah, blah blah blah", giving you the exact right answer.
Former Teen Rebel: Kelly confesses to Dwight and Jim that she spent a year in juvenile hall for stealing her ex-boyfriend's father's boat.
Genki Girl: Very bubbly and fast-talking.
Gossipy Hens: Obsessed with celebrity gossip.
It's All About Me: Acts "righteously" upset at Darryl when he chooses to spend time with his daughter over her, constantly lies to her boyfriends that she's pregnant, seeming to genuinely not understand why this might upset them, and let's not forget her defining moment of Disproportionate Retribution mentioned above.
Jerkass: She's shrill, immature, superficial, clingy, narcissistic, two-faced, bitchy, self-centered and all things being equal kind of annoying.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: While she's most definitely capable of being selfish, bitchy, and rude, she also cares enough about her coworkers to invite them to events. At one point she not only throws a party, but makes everyone personalized mugs as party favours. She's also perhaps the employee who's closest to Toby.
Karma Houdini: When she sabotages Jim and Dwight's performance reviews because they didn't attend a party she hosted, threatening their income. Because it's Michael she has to answer to, he sympathizes with her side of the story and lets her off scot-free.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: After going through Sabre's minority executive training program at Yale, she believes herself to now be a sophisticated, savvy businesswomen. In reality, she's no smarter than she was before and the higher ups don't trust her to do anything other than trivial tasks such as picking the company's annual employee Christmas gift (which she's still bad at). It's also heavily implied that she only made it through the course in the first place thanks to the Sextra Credit.
Manipulative Bitch: Kelly is incredibly manipulative, though usually not incredibly subtle about it. In particular, she tends to rely heavily on emotional manipulation, playing the victim, guilt-tripping and various other teenage Alpha Bitch-level tools of manipulation. And she tends to over-rely on them to the point where they lose effectiveness; Michael at one point has to wearily tell her that she can't just keep claiming to have been raped solely to get out of trouble, implying she does this often, and in a later episode in the series, she notes that she's reached a point where she basically has to threaten to kill herself in order to get anyone to do anything for her.
Motor Mouth: To the point that she admits that she doesn't even to listen to herself anymore.
Odd Friendship:
She has a strange friendship with Jim in early seasons and she occasionally talks to him about her relationship with Ryan. Even if they have nothing in common, Jim is good at tolerating her and is generally nice to her.
She also gets along particularly well with Toby, to the point of them wearing matching Halloween costumes. Note that Kelly is a loud, shrill, and self-centred girl while Toby is somewhat morose with little sense of personal style.
One-Steve Limit: Averted with the new receptionist Kelly in season 5. To get around this, receptionist Kelly is always referred to by her middle name, Erin.
Put on a Bus: She left the office to be with her fiancé in order to go to Miami University in Ohio.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Ryan and Kelly. He was an aloof and snarky temp who is one of the smartest characters, she was a ditzy and bubbly chatterbox.
Sextra Credit: She may have used this tactic during her time in the training program at Yale, based on the reaction from one of her professors when she calls him during her presentation in "The Seminar".
Prof. Powell: (salaciously) Hey, Kelly Kapoor. What a delicious surprise...
Kelly: Professor Powell, you are on speakerphone.
Prof. Powell: (suddenly nervous) Uh, why?
Token Minority: She's the sole employee of Asian (Indian specifically) descent.
The Whitest Black Guy: She doesn't know all that much about Indian culture, including not knowing if Buddha is a Hindu god.
Womanchild : The best way to describe Kelly is a teenager in a grown woman's body. Best shown when she sees Stanley's 12 year-old daughter developing a crush on Ryan and considers her a threat to their relationship.
Wrong Genre Savvy:
She often quotes and acts out romantic movie tropes. She's actually in a Cringe Comedy work-com.
On another level, she tends to treat the cameras as if they're making a Kardashians/Real Housewives-style reality show about beautiful glamorous people living beautiful glamorous lives in beautiful glamorous settings and engaging in beautiful glamorous bitchiness and backstabbing, of which she is of course the star. As opposed to being a relatively minor player in a fly-on-the-wall documentary about life in a humdrum and schlubby regional paper company, which is what she actually is. Which can't help but make one wonder what her reaction would be to the fact that the shy, dowdy receptionist she kind of looks down on is given a more prominent role in the documentary than she ends up getting.