Abhorrent Admirer: He is like this with just about any female, often making lewd comments to them, and sometimes even admitting when something turns him on.
Acrofatic: He's surprisingly athletic despite being overweight, being a sharpshooter in basketball and an excellent golfer. When he needs to use the bathroom he can move at warp speed.
Big Eater: When Pam was pregnant, they start eating together because they get hungry at the same times. But not all meals. Just second breakfast, lunch, second lunch, and first dinner.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Ambiguous, and possibly a case of Depending on the Writer. Some episodes he seems genuinely dim, other times he is shown to be quite smart and even devious, such as swindling Daryl and Andy out of money in the Dallas boardgame, being a former world poker champion, winning a trivia contest against the dozens of other players including most of the office and more, but what is consistent is that he doesn't want to work and he just wants an easy laidback life.
Brutal Honesty: In the 9th season, Kevin's social skills lessen and he noticeably becomes more blunt with his observations such as telling Senator Lipton that he's a terrible person for using Oscar and Angela and telling Andy that he isn't cut out to be a famous actor.
Character Development: In the first season Kevin was extremely dull and monosyllabic. Later episodes show him being more excitable and talkative.
Cloudcuckoolander: Especially in later seasons, he's prone to random statements.
Dumb and Drummer: Played With. His stupidity is shown mostly through his incompetence at his day job, and he is a talented musician instead. In fact, his hobby of playing the drums in a rock band shows that he does at least have some skills.
Dumbass Has a Point: Despite the Took a Level in Dumbass described below, Kevin regularly drops insightful and astute comments on what's happening in the office. Happens frequently in seasons 8 and 9.
Fat Idiot: He's overweight and becomes much dumber after his Flanderization in later seasons.
Fat Slob: Fat, and often shown to be a gross and gluttonous Big Eater.
The Gambling Addict: He's been in financial trouble because of his compulsive gambling and seeks to save himself by gambling even more.
Genius Ditz: While he's not all that bright and a terrible accountant, he's a talented singer (as seen in "Beach Games"), musician, cook, and basketball player. And he can do relatively impressive math in his head... so long as pies are involved. He also ends up being very successful as a bar owner after he gets fired. Maybe Dwight firing him was better for him in the long run.
Has a Type: While he lusts after any woman he considers "hot", he especially thinks that moms and women wearing glasses are hot.
Hidden Depths: He is quite a good cook, sings and plays drums in a band, can play basketball very well, and is a World Champion poker player; the latter fact in particular implies that his idiocy might be Obfuscating Stupidity, and there are hints in some episodes that he is actually embezzeling money from the company under the guise of "mistakes" that everyone expects him to make as he is a "bad" accountant.
Idiot Houdini: He is either this or a Karma Houdini, depending on how stupid one thinks he may be. He regularly sexually harasses Pam in the workplace and in front of others, but is never disciplined in any way for doing so.
Idiot Savant: Everyone openly acknowledges that he is a poor accountant and is terrible with numbers. Yet, he can do fairly complex math if the final answer involves pies. He is also a gifted athlete and poker player.
Jim: Let's go, driver! Laverne packs up the pie wagon at five...so...[makes a "let's roll" gesture]
Kevin: At five? That's only 20 minutes from now! The pie shop is 13 miles away. So at 55 miles an hour, that just gives us five minutes to spare!
Angela: So wait, when pies are involved you can suddenly do math in your head?
Oscar: Hold on, Kevin. How much is 19154 pies divided by 61 pies?
Kevin: 314 pies!
Oscar: What if it were salads?
Kevin: Well...it's the...carry the four...and the...it doesn't work!
Innocently Insensitive: He has a habit of speaking to women (Pam mostly) in a way that would be considered sexual harrassment if he was smarter. Kevin also tells Oscar that he would love prison.
The Internet Is for Porn: In the Series Finale Dwight says that Kevin's Internet searches were so filthy they had to burn his computer.
Karma Houdini Warranty: Surprisingly, one of the few aversions to the Karma Houdini status most of the employees at Dunder Mifflin have; in the finale, when Dwight takes over, he fires Kevin; downplayed because the reason Dwight fires him isn't because of the insider trading Kevin has admitted to, the below mentioned Porn Stash, or the sexual remarks he's made about his female coworkers; it was simply because Kevin was an inefficient workernote .
Kindhearted Simpleton: Because of his stupidity, he's almost never portrayed as an outright Jerkass like his co-workers, although he's often Innocently Insensitive with his sexual remarks about women.
The Load: To the accounting department. In his defense, he had originally planned on working in the warehouse, not the accounting department, but Michael apparently saw potential in him, possibly because he had a college degree unlike most warehouse workers. Michael even openly admits that the office doesn't need three accountants, yet he keeps all of them anyway.
LOL, 69: Jim mentions it's his favorite number and he makes a goofy smirk when he tells the camera that he sets the office thermostat to 69°. Unsurprising considering his aforementioned love of dirty jokes.
Manchild: He's immature and has a childish sense of humor.
Odd Friendship: With the rest of the accounting department, especially Oscar.
Even if Oscar is The Smart Guy, he seems to get along well with Kevin, probably the dumbest guy in the office.
To a lesser extent, also with Angela, despite her unfriendly personality. They hug when they learn that their branch is not closing in season 3. In one of the later episodes, it's shown that Kevin sees both Oscar and Angela as parental figures.
He also grows relatively close with Pam during her pregnancy, as they get hungry around the same time. He even cooks meals and so-called Ultra Feasts for the two of them to share.
Porn Stash: Keeps one in the office and on the computer. A minor running gag is him having an Oh, Crap! moment whenever he realizes that someone might be able to see what's on his computer.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Has given out two in the series; first to Angela in “The Duel”, for cheating on Andy with Dwight, also pointing out her hypocrisy. And then to Senator Lipton in “Vandalism”, for not only cheating on both Angela and Oscar, but using them as pawns to further his political career.
Secret-Keeper: Of the relationship between Oscar and Senator Lipton. Even he himself doesn't think he can actually keep the secret, but he somehow does.
Simpleton Voice: Low-pitched and nasally, almost as if he's impersonating a Fat Idiot as opposed to being one.
Supreme Chef: It's not something that gets much exploration, but it's established that Kevin is a talented enough chef to have worked through Julia Child's cookbook. He also likes to bring his own chilli in to work at least once a year, and he's a good enough chef to put his own creative spin on the recipe.
Sweet Tooth: A Big Eater in general but he especially loves sweets like candy, pies, cakes, cookies, etc. He also keeps a large stash of M&M's in his desk.
Took a Level in Dumbass: The longer the show's on the air, the dumber he gets. It's hard to reconcile the Kevin of recent seasons as being the same character revealed to have won a World Series of Poker bracelet in season two except that Kevin grows increasingly reliant on his Obfuscating Stupidity in order to avoid doing work and being saddled with responsibilites.
Trademark Favorite Food: Cup Noodles and M&M's.
Vocal Evolution: In the first two seasons he speaks with a flat monotone (basically Brian Baumgartner using his natural speaking voice), similar to his UK counterpart Keith. Once he Took a Level in Dumbass, he became louder, more expressive, and even a little gravelly.