Abhorrent Admirer: To Jim a couple times, and to Andy at least once. When Dwight and Andy announce their duel over Angela, she calls dibs on the loser and neither appears to enjoy that prospect either.
Absurd Phobia: One Halloween Episode has her reveal, thanks to Robert, that she's afraid of Jim.
The Alcoholic: Obviously. She defends this by saying that since she was studying and working at the same time, that's just what college students do.
Amazingly Embarrassing Parents: Most parents would be horrified if the stripper hired for a party they were at was their child. Meredith is clearly proud when it happens to her, and goes as far as to tell him to pretend she's not there rather than leaving the room.
Butt-Monkey: Has a bat trapped against her head, hit by a car (resulting in a broken pelvis), sets her hair on fire, gets rabies and gets hit in the face with a football. Also, when lice is brought in to the office, everyone thinks Meredith brought them in and she shaves her hair off. Pam was actually to blame.
Drives Like Crazy: She frequently drives while drunk and nearly gets Michael and the women of the office killed while speeding to the mall.
Easily Forgiven: While she's initially angry that Pam lets her take the fall for bringing lice into the office, resulting in Meredith shaving her head, she's also quick to accept Pam's apology and invite her out for a drink after work, where the two have a genuinely nice time together. She's also relatively quick to forgive Michael after he hits her with his car.
Everyone Has Standards: She won't sleep with anyone who's in a relationship. She will do it with a terrorist though.
Fan Disservice: She's a middle-aged woman whose body is out of shape and her face has been compared to a man's face, so any nudity scene with is this trope. And the characters all act repulsive and/or disgusted whenever that happens or whenever her sex life is brought up.
Fiery Redhead: She's got bright red hair and is one of the most impulsive women in the office.
Going Commando: On a casual day, she wore a short dress with no panties (and no bra), to the chagrin of the rest of the office.
Hidden Depths: In the finale, she reveals that she had been working on her PhD in school psychology which was never shown in the documentary.
Kavorka Man: Gender inverted. Meredith isn't much of a looker, but she has no trouble getting men to sleep with her. She also says that men "are more attracted" to her back.
Lady Drunk: She can knock back a lot of booze. When Michael makes a Gargle Blaster of scotch, rum, absinthe, gin, vermouth, triple sec, and two packs of Splenda during an office Christmas party, Meredith loves it. The others do try to get her to go to rehab, but she refuses, stating she's able to function well in spite of it.
Nice Girl: Although she certainly has her limits, she's generally kind to her coworkers, is quick to make friends, and doesn't hold a grudge even if most people would find it reasonable. She's also clearly overjoyed when she's nominated for a Dundie.
Odd Friendship: With Dwight, although it rarely gets much focus - although to be fair Dwight has this relationship with most people. This is best exemplified in his final talking head of the series, where he lists a few employees of Dunder Mifflin he's grown especially close with. These are Pam (his best friend), Jim (the best man at his wedding), Angela (His wife), Oscar (Godfather to his child), and Meredith, who he calls the only person he knows how to properly headbang to Motorhead. She's also the only person in the office - apart from himself - who he thinks could realistically survive in an apocalypse.
Really Gets Around: Despite her age, poor hygiene, and alcoholism, Meredith has an active sex life and well known for it among her co-workers.
STD Immunity: Averted. She has herpes and isn't too bothered by it.
Tropaholics Anonymous: She's been in quite a few twelve-step programs, judging from this exchange in "Boys and Girls".
Jan: Why don't we go around the table and all say something that we know we're good at. I will start. I am good at public speaking.
Meredith: Hi. I'm Meredith and I'm an alcoh...good at supplier relations.
Unproblematic Prostitution: She reveals that she's been essentially prostituting herself to give Dunder Mifflin steep supplier discounts. When corporate finds out about this, she's shielded from punishment because the company is in such rough financial shape and every saving is appreciated. Her Scranton colleagues, meanwhile, quickly get over their initial disgust because she's been getting Outback Steakhouse gift cards as "tips" and they get free meals out of the arrangement.