Ambition Is Evil: An interesting case. Averted in the first four and a half seasons in which her artistic aspiration is treated as one of her more positive qualities but played painfully straight after that. She quits her job to help Michael poach clients from her former co-workers in order to get promoted to sales. It's elaborated a bit that Pam frequently gets bored where she is and the bottled up frustration causes her to make too big a jump forward. As a result she also often runs out of steam and gives up on the thing she was ambitous for after she finds out it's harder than she thought. Ultimately the job she sticks with is one she made up that amounted to what she was already doing as a receptionist but without having to make calls. Worth noting is that when she contests Jim's plans to move to Philadelphia so he can start a new business, Pam is shown to be the more sympathetic of the two.
Babies Ever After: By the final season she has a daughter (Cecelia) and a son (Phillip) with Jim.
Bavarian Fire Drill: Pam, realizing that she's not cut out for sales, claims she's been the (previously non-existent) Office Administrator for months. Gabe tries to meekly get her to admit that she made up the promotion, but she remains assertive and orders Gabe to either call her bluff or give her the job. He gives in.
The first lesson of watching World Poker Tour at 2 AM: you play the opponent, not the cards.
Berserk Button: Do not call her "Pammy". And definitely don't date her mother if your name is Michael Scott.
Best Friend: Aside from Jim, she's also one to Dwight. He said this in the show finale.
Betty and Veronica: In the third season, she's the Betty to Karen's Veronica, being rather meek, quiet, and risk adverse.
Beware the Nice Ones: Especially in later seasons, when she has learned to stand up for herself.
Beware the Quiet Ones: In early seasons, she seems a sweet Shrinking Violet but often helps Jim pranking Dwight.
Birds of a Feather: With Jim, both being apathetic about their work, and aware of being more normal and reasonable compared to their quirky coworkers. They are also both considered the most attractive and desirable people in the office, but don't have much social life outside of work.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Despite her typical niceness, she has a selfish and passive aggressive streak, having a fairly low opinion of her co-workers aside from Jim, Oscar, Toby and Darryl. Not to mention that she likes being The Gadfly along with Jim.
Bookends: On her last day of work, Pam answers the receptionist's phone with "Dunder Mifflin, this is Pam".
Break the Haughty: After becoming more ambitious to the point where she thinks she's better than the rest of her co-workers, Pam gets into sales and finds out that she's nowhere near as good at it as the rest of the team.
Butt-Monkey: Mostly in the early seasons when she's much more of a Shrinking Violet, frequently being put in extremely awkward situations by Michael, but less so after she gains confidence after Beach Games. Slightly occurs again when Michael begins dating her mother, much to her horror and chagrin.
Cannot Spit It Out: Is something of Pam's reoccurring flaw to the point where she can almost be a Master of the Mixed Message at times. Due to coming out of a controlling relationship with Roy, Pam has a hard time firmly speaking her mind and being honest about her feelings. This leads into dramatic results in particular in the final season when Jim starts pushing for a new business venture in Philadelphia; Pam is relunctant to tell him about her struggles raising their kids by herself or her desire to remain in Scranton and Jim takes this silence as Pam supporting his actions.
Cannot Tell a Joke: Pam can snark with the best of them, but when it comes to ice-breakers she tends to fall flat.
I got Erin a new computer, because the one at reception sucked. I should know. And I don't wanna say the other one was old, but its I.P. number was one!... Right?
Cathartic Crying: Pam tends to keep her cool during most situations - usually reacting with bored resignation - but when she's faced with the reality of how holepess her situation can be, she'll let them loose. A key moment being when Pam starts crying in the middle of a talking head while discussing how much of her childhood dreams are unattainable.
Character Development:
Pam learns to gain a backbone and be more honest about her true feelings concerning both Roy (her ex-fiancee she doesn't love anymore) and Jim (her One True Love). She became also more assertive even to the point of being brutally honest sometimes.
Profesionally she learns to be adaptive about her artistic dream (going a while in a school to improve her skills though it's not worked). And in the office being tired to be receptionist, she changed to be a salesman and then the office administrator.
Pam started out as very sullen towards her job, but by the start of Season 7 she's married to a man she loves, has a baby and was promoted to saleswoman, so she's got a more positive outlook on her situation, which she demonstrates by participating in the "Nobody but Me" tribute video.
In the show finale, she finally gave up her still persistent insecurity and self-doubt, she fully support Jim in his ambitions outside Scranton selling their house to go in Austin ready herself to moving forward.
Characterization Marches On: After the earlier seasons implied she's not very athletic nor had any interest in sports, "Company Picnic" in season 5 reveals that she's a whiz at volleyball and played the sport all through high school.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder:
She's generally the one who has to take on this role for Michael, but even then she still has a hard time keeping him on the ground.
When she's not antagonizing Dwight, she is also sometimes this to him, particularly when he gets a concussion.
Comedic Mustache: Invoked. On Halloween, Pam decides to dress as Charlie Chaplin for work, only to be dismayed when she finds out that the costumes were only a custom in Michael Scott's workplace, not in the new one she works in. To add insult to injury, Pam quickly finds out that she must wear the bowler hat for her costume at all times because it looks like a Hitler costume without it.
Crying Wolf: Pam uses her second pregnancy to get out of boring situations by shouting "I'm going into labor!". Unfortunately - due to her social circle being who they are - she ends up pulling this one on everybody and they call her a liar on the last one. Then Pam gets the carpet wet and everyone realizes she's not lying this time...only for a water bottle to fall out of her shirt.
Deadpan Snarker: Steadily became more of one over time.
Did They or Didn't They?: It's implied in a Season 7 episode that Jim and Pam had sex at work, but both deny it. Come Season 8 and Pam is heavily pregnant.
Double Date: Jim and Pam get suckered into double-dating Michael and Jan, then Phyllis and Bob Vance. Both convince the two that they should avoid double-dates with their co-workers, to the annoyance of Erin when she starts dating Pete.
Dude Magnet:
Was engaged to Roy; Jim spent three years in love with her before hooking up; Brian the boom mic guy has a crush on her and so does Toby; Andy and Ryan tried to ask her out; Kevin considers her the hottest woman in the office. Michael has also expressed his attraction to her a few times. Creed has stated his desire to see her topless. The Ben Franklin impersonator hit on her after only one hour.
She also dated Danny Cordray (Timothy Olyphant) and Kelly's cartoonist friend. Subverted with the former who ends up dumping Pam after their second date because she is too "dorky". Also subverted with Dwight who apparently thinks she is "plain"; when he stands up for her, he tells Danny that Pam is "One of the plain hearty women of Scranton that make this city great. And so what if she doesn't wear makeup? We like her better that way!"
Subverted when Ryan moves up to corporate and tries to be a slick New Yorker. He describes her as a seven for Scranton but maybe a six for New York.
She is aware of this and in one episode she gets jealous when an attractive woman named Katy comes into the office and becomes the new Dude Magnet among the male co-workers, including Jim. It doesn't help that Kevin outright tells Pam "She's much prettier than you".
Enemy Mine: Pam doesn't think very highly of Ryan, but during the brief period where they were working for Michael's ill-planned paper company the two gradually form a sense of camraderie. Given Ryan's erratic and insufferable personality, this doesn't last.
Everyone Can See It: With Jim. Phyllis and Angela straight up tell Pam they're aware of the sexual tension.
Everyone Has Standards: Like Jim, Pam enjoys a good prank, but she'll draw the line at some of Dwight's outright harmful ways of messing with people, such as the time he tried to suffocate Clark for a laugh.
Everyone Knows Morse: Jim and Pam went out of their way to learn Morse Code so they could make fun of Dwight without speaking.
Expository Hairstyle Change: After she starts going out with Jim in season 4, she wears her hair down and ditches the button-up shirts. She reverts back to her old look once she has a baby due to the maintenance, but she still finds moments to get dolled up.
Extreme Doormat: Pam tolerates absolutely everything Roy does while they're together, no matter how insensitive or borderline abusive. She gets better, to the point where Pam has no reservation telling Jim when she disagrees with him.
Fake Facial Hair: Pam decides to dress as Charlie Chaplin for Halloween and uses paint for the mustache.
Fatal Flaw: Pam's biggest flaw, especially in the early seasons, is that she's afraid of taking any risks. A big part of the reason she refuses to leave Roy for Jim is because the two of them have been together for so long and she was afraid to disrupt her life. It's also why she remains a receptionist at Dunder-Mifflin for so long even though she hates the job. Why she gets better about it in later seasons, it occasionally creeps up again such as when she expresses worry that Jim's new marketing startup will flop and they'll lose their investment.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Melancholic
The Gadfly: Like Jim, she likes to mess with Michael and/or Dwight for her own amusement.
Girl Next Door: A big part of her appeal is how approachable she is, combined with her obvious but understated good looks.
The Glasses Gotta Go: A variation occurs in Season 2. When Pam lets her hair down she goes from being quietly pretty to breathtakingly gorgeous. Michael notices, which causes Pam to quickly tie her hair up again. Invoked in a Season 4 episode where Pam loses her contact lenses and comes to work wearing thick glasses. Everyone comments on how ugly she looks, except for Kevin who has a librarian fetish.
Green-Eyed Epiphany: Pam first noticed her feelings for Jim when he began a relationship with Katy, a purse saleswoman. She also burst into tears when Jim was dating Karen.
Grew a Spine: Pam comes out of her shell towards the end of Season 3 after running over a bed of hot coals, leading to a public chewing out towards everyone treating her like a doormat, but especially towards Jim for quitting on their friendship.
Guilty Pleasures: Ryan's awful poetry.
Happily Married: With Jim as of early season 6. They go through a couple of rough spots, especially in season 9, but the marriage survives.
When you're a kid you assume your parents are soul mates. My kids are gonna be right about that.
Head-Turning Beauty: Pam gets the attention of jus about every man who isn't Dwight, Daryl or Stanley. Even Oscar jokingly implied he would go straight for her.
The Heart: Pam gives Jim a reason to come to work. She also keeps Michael from embarrassing himself more than he typically does and she's able to get on Dwight's good side from time to time. Then Brian the boom guy starts interfering with the documentary because Pam's distressed and she gets the closing speech in the finale.
Heroic BSoD: Pam gets an especially tense one when Jim surprises her by purchasing his parent's old house without telling her. She tries to hide it knowing that Jim meant well, but it's clear she's pretty disturbed that he would make such a massive decision without telling her beforehand. Come Season 9 and it's revealed to be one of several bumps in their marriage that's convinced Pam to seek out couple's counselling.
I Hate Past Me: Pam's self-assessment in the finale.
I didn't watch the whole documentary. After a few episodes, it was too painful. I kept wanting to scream at Pam. It took me so long to do so many important things. It's just hard to accept that I spent so many years being less happy than I could have been. Jim was 5 feet from my desk and it took me 4 years to get to him. It'd be great if people saw this documentary and learned from my mistakes. Not that I'm a tragic person. I'm really happy now. But it would just... just make my heart soar if someone out there saw this and she said to herself "Be strong, trust yourself, love yourself. Conquer your fears. Just go after what you want and act fast, because life just isn't that long."
Imagine the Audience Naked: After walking in on Michael with his pants off, Pam does not recommend this.
If anything, picture them with more clothes.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy:
Pam says as much when Jim applies for the corporate job in New York, knowing that he'd have to move away from Scranton and Karen would have him all to herself. To her joy, Jim throws it all away for Pam because she makes him happy.
After Jim steps away from Athlead to save their marriage, Pam feels guilty and resolves to make it up to him. One year later she sells their house so he can move closer to Athlead's main office and have the best of both worlds.
Jerkass Ball: Pam's first instance being in the Season 2 Christmas episode, when Jim got her as a Secret Santa and went out of his way to make her a meaningful gift. As soon as Michael enacted his mean-spirited "Yankee swap" game, Pam swapped the gift for an iPod rather than protest the idea.
Jerkass to One:
When Jim starts dating Katy, Pam barely masks her contempt for her and engages in Passive-Aggressive Kombat that she never does with another character.
She develops this dynamic with Ryan later on, often being the first to lose patience with his snide comments and hipster ways, such as his desire that the next manager be a homeless person, or his faux grief at the death of Smokey Robinson. Notably, one of the only times we ever see Pam genuinely angry is as a result of Ryan taking offence to her comparing breadsticks to crack, and even im is visibly taken aback.
Like Brother and Sister:
Her relationship with Michael. She often behaves a lot like a little sister who has to take care of her stupid big brother. Best seen when she races to the airport to hug him goodbye.
With Dwight. There are moments where Dwight actually tries to be as supportive as possible towards her. By the end of the series, the two are pretty much like siblings. In the finale, Dwight even says she is his best friend.
Love Martyr: How she comes across in her scenes with Roy in the first two seasons, since she tries to be the dutiful girlfriend but he's too self-centered and insensitive to care.
Lust Object: Occasionally seen this way by her male-coworkers, especially Kevin. Even Michael thinks she's the only "hot one", while he belittles the appearance of all the other women in the office (including the conventionally attractive Karen).
Master of the Mixed Message: A major theme in Season 2 is how she acts this way towards Jim, initiating interactions with him in a flirtatious way (despite being engaged to Roy), but then behaving a bit coldly if he initiates anything. Best exemplified by how she literally makes a point of hanging out with Jim in his bedroom in "Email Surveillance", then one episode later in "Christmas Party" she doesn't try to get the teapot he bought for her back in the "Yankee Swap" game, hurting his feelings.
Moving-Away Ending: Jim and Pam move to Texas in the series finale.
My Fist Forgives You: Pam whacks Michael after he dumped her mother on her own birthday.
My Own Private "I Do": Breaks down shortly before the wedding as their friends and family are driving her crazy. Luckily, Jim had tickets for the boat ready.
"No More Holding Back" Speech: Pam's Character Development kicks in with this at the end of the Beach Episode.
 I wanna say something; I've been trying to be more honest lately, and I just need to say a few things...I did the coal walk! Just...I did it! Michael, you couldn't even do that! Maybe I should be your boss? Wow, I feel really good right now.
Why didn't any of you come to my art show? I invited all of you. That really sucked. It's like sometimes some of you act like I don't even exist.
Jim, I called off my wedding because of you. And now we're not even friends. And things are just, like, weird between us, and that sucks. And I miss you. You were my best friend before you went to Stamford. And I really miss you. I shouldn't have been with Roy. And there were a lot of reasons to call off my wedding. But the truth is, I didn't care about any of those reasons until I met you. And now you're with someone else. And that's fine. It's...Whatever. That's not what I'm-I'm not...Okay, my feet really hurt. The thing that I'm just trying to say to you, Jim - and to everyone else in the circle, I guess - is that I miss having fun with you. Just you, not everyone in the circle. Okay, I am gonna go walk in the water now.
Oblivious to Love: She appears innocently unaware of Toby's heavy crush on her and treats him as little more than a friend, though it is debatable how much of this is just her politely deciding to ignore the elephant in the room.
Odd Friendship:
With Michael, Dwight and Angela, though all three friendships are off-again, on-again. She is notably one of the few who will ever play along with Michael and Dwight's odder moments, such as Dwight's Recyclops act. She cheered him on while everyone else was just resignedly annoyed. Come the finale and Dwight openly acknowledges her as his best friend.
She also has a close friendship with Kevin which develops during her first pregnancy, as he regularly cooks large meals for them to share. She's clearly overjoyed to see him for the first time after her maternity leave.
Only Sane Woman: Oscar labels himself, Toby, Jim, and Pam as Dunder Mifflin's 'Coalition of Reason'.
Pet the Dog: One of Jim's prank on Dwight that involves Pam's assistance has her write messages to Dwight while she's pretending to be a sentient computer which is competing with Dwight. Dwight does end up winning against the computer. But since Angela is breaking up with Dwight, he's crushed at the moment, and Pam writes to Dwight "You beat me. You are the superior being." to give him some comfort.
Plucky Office Girl: Her dream was always to be an Happily Married artist, but at the start of the series, she's a receptionist who has to put up with an insane boss and co-workers that treat her like dirt, and a fiancé that hardly shows interest in her at all. A confidence boost and a new relationship at the start of season 4 turn things around for her, though. The artist thing doesn't work out, but she does end up Happily Married and with a job she likes.
Retcon: Her name has been changed in canon three times without even counting going from a maiden name to taking Jim's. Her last name has been spelled differently multiple times in the first two seasons, and her middle name inexplicably changes from Jean to Morgan.
Sexy Secretary: Her male co-workers regard her as one.
Sexy Sweater Girl: As a receptionist. Mostly cardigans (check out the photo) but starts to wear more form-fitting turtlenecks as she gains confidence. She switches to suits when she starts working in Sales. Roy also says that as part of her "artsy-fartsy" identity in high school, she wore turtlenecks.
She Cleans Up Nicely: The first time Pam lets her hair down, Kelly compliments her looks, Michael makes an inappropriate remark and Jim stares wistfully at her.
Shipper on Deck: For Andy and Erin. She also ships Oscar with Matt from the warehouse: "Yes, they're the only two gay guys I know. But they should be together." For Michael/Holly and Dwight/Angela as well.
Pam reluctantly tried to pair up Michael and her former landlady, simply because Michael's wangsting over his latest breakup was annoying her more than usual.
Shrinking Violet: In early years.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: The reason she likes Jim is because he's funny, it's easy to talk to him, and he encourages her aspirations.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Angela. The animosity is mostly one-sided, but Pam understandably doesn't want to try building bridges with her outside of sending mass invitations.
Small Name, Big Ego: Downplayed. While Pam isn't exactly egotistical, she does have a tendency to look down on the rest of her co-workers despite the fact their jobs and skills are considerably more vital to the branch's operations than hers are. In fact, during her time as a receptionist she has to go out of her way to keep Dunder-Mifflin from installing a new phone system that would make her job redundant.
So Beautiful, It's a Curse: Pam doesn't go out of her way to look attractive, precisely because she's in a workplace where sexual harassment is all but encouraged by a boss who doesn't know the first thing about how to talk to women. Michael goes as far as trying to kiss Pam at one point.
Usually the day we talk about sexual harrassment is the day everyone harasses me.
Spanner in the Works: Back when she was receptionist, Pam would come up with ways to keep Michael from interacting with the Techstar salesman, as the new phone system they've developed would put her out of a job. Jim naturally helps.
Straight Man: Along with Jim she is this to the wackiness that emanates from various corners of the office.
Team Mom: As Michael's Minder, she sometimes ends up with this role when he needs help with his ill-conceived attempts to be the Team Dad.
Took a Level in Badass: She starts off as an insecure Extreme Doormat in the first three seasons, until the episode "Beach Games" where she finds the courage to run barefoot across the hot coals and then to tell everyone how she really feels and give a "The Reason You Suck" Speech to her co-workers. She becomes much more confident in later seasons.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Downplayed. After she learns to stand up for herself and gains more confidence, she sometimes takes it too far and starts acting smug.
This fades away when Pam realizes she's not cut out for sales. After being on maternity leave, she's outright ecstatic to hang out with her co-workers.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: With Jim in season 3. She turned him down in favor of her marriage with Roy in season's 2 finale, but realizes this was a mistake when Jim transfers to Stamford and comes back with a girlfriend.
Verbal Tic: "Dunder Mifflin, this is Pam" became this out of habit. Pam admits that she sometimes answers her home phone in this manner.
Your Approval Fills Me with Shame: Pam doesn't appreciate the compliments she gets from Michael and Kevin regarding her looks.