Above the Influence: In "Christmas Wishes", it seemed for awhile that he would try to take advantage of Erin's drunkenness when he offered to take her home, considering the divorce he was going through, a few comments he made to her, and the fact that he convinced her to drink in the first place. But no, he drops her off, gives her some advice, and leaves, much to the relief of Andy, who followed them suspecting the same thing.
The Alcoholic: Somewhat. It isn't a normal part of his personality, but he definitely has his episodes. The primary one was in "Turf War", where he comes into the office hungover, and it is explicitly mentioned that he got drunk the night before out of depression about his divorce, and among other things, shut down another branch and tried to hit on Nellie.
Ambiguously Bi:
Especially played up in the 8th season finale, Spader's last episode as a regular. He hijacks Oscar's "It gets better" video, drinks a coconut and penis-flavored energy drink (lamenting the fact that they added coconut), and kisses Andy on the lips.
Deleted scenes from the episode Free Family Portrait Studio would have destroyed any and all ambiguity, as there was a sub-plot where Robert compliments Jim and Pam on their intimate relationship, and then says "I want to be part of it" and invites them to come to his home on Saturday night. Eventually he decides to cancel but he confirms that yes, he was asking for a threesome, and he only decide against it because he had started to see Jim and Pam less as subordinates and more as equals and "without the underlying power dynamic I'm just a guy f*cking two parents."
And Starring: Spader gets an "And James Spader" credit as of Season 8.
Badass Boast: Low-key but nevertheless chillingly accurate:
Andy: [when Robert is just sitting in his office while he himself is having a difficult personal conversation with Erin] I hope this isn't making you uncomfortable.
Robert: I am never uncomfortable.
Charm Person: His skills at persuasion border on the uncanny— he manages to convince Jo to give him her job over the course of a single conversation.
Cloudcuckoolander: In a different way from other characters on the show. His modus operandi is to make himself unpredictable and unreadable to keep everybody on edge around him, such as provoking rivalry between office members, giving employees tasks he works to undermine, and delivering a kiss on the lips to Andy as a goodbye. He even claims that Andy doesn't know his real name, and introduces himself with a different name to David Wallace, making it unclear which name is real, if either, or how many names he's used.
Jim: Robert California will walk around the office and just strike up a conversation with a random person. It's intense and creepy; but also weirdly exhilarating.
Contrasting Replacement Character: To Michael. While Michael was an awkward, childish, and excitable boss who was secretly brilliant in his field and wanted everybody to be his friend, Robert is a genius who makes bad decisions and maintains a stoic yet dominant demeanour and tries to keep the people around him uncomfortable and subordinate.
Creepy Monotone: He rarely goes outside of his cold, measured manner, even when actively threatening people.
Dirty Old Man: He's obsessed with sex, to the point where his farewell has him mention how he's going to be spending time with numerous young women of various nationalities who happen to be in peak physical condition. Nellie also implies that Robert propositioned her via a drunk-dial.
Fan of the Underdog: Not so much one himself, but he does invoke this trope in his making Andy Regional Manager, claiming that it works on the "unexceptional".
Last Episode, New Character: He is introduced in the season 7 finale.
Manipulative Bastard: He managed to talk Jo - previously established as far from stupid herself - into giving him her job. Jim is both amazed and quietly terrified by this.
Jim: [during Search Committee, right after his interview] He creeps me out. But I think he might be a genius.
In The Season 8 Halloween party episode he spends the entire party ambling around quietly finding out what everyone's deepest fears are, and then improvises a ghost story designed to play on all their fears and also bring them all together as a group, releasing all their tensions, and incredibly, it works, thereby combining this trope with Jerk with a Heart of Gold.
Pointy-Haired Boss: Seemed to ping-pong in and out of this trope for awhile, Depending on the Writer. After his divorce with his wife, however, he dove headlong into this trope, making a series of bizarre decisions that drove Sabre into the ground, Dunder-Mifflin only surviving due to the intervention of Andy and David Wallace.
Promotion to Opening Titles: In season 8.
Put on a Bus: In the season 8 finale, he convinces David Wallace to give him a new job, "helping" undereducated Eastern European high school gymnasts. We won't be seeing him again, but dear, oh dear, those poor gymnasts...
Really Gets Around: While he seems predominantly attracted to women, there's hints that Robert is bisexual or even pansexual. During his house party, he tries to get Ryan and Gabe into a three-way.
Serious Business: He has some sort of intense obsession with Sesame Street (or as he calls it, "The Street"). He cites a short film he saw about paper production on the show as a qualification to work at Dunder Mifflin, thinks the rise of Elmo on the show is a sign of how "ours is a cultural ghetto", and his son is named Bert.
Slave to PR: It doesn't come up much, but some of his decisions are apparently tied to Jo's legacy. Notably, despite not believing that the retail store idea would work, he had to go along with it anyway since Jo endorsed it (though he got around that by claiming that one of the employees in charge of the project botched the execution).
Slimeball: While he oscillates between being a Pointy-Haired Boss and Manipulative Bastard, he regards almost everything in terms of sex. Whenever he talks to his staff one-on-one, they usually go away with a vague feeling that they've somehow been sexually harassed regardless of the topic of discussion. He even tries to start a naked pool orgy at a party he hosts at his house, much to the extreme discomfort of the guests who all work for him.
Robert: There is only sex. Everything is sex. Do you understand that what I'm telling you is a universal truth?