Actually Pretty Funny: On rare occasions, an absurd scenario does manage to make him laugh.
Dwight trying to fire him for the first time actually causes his first on-screen laugh.
Pretzel Day is the only day of the year where he gets along with Michael, with Stanley even going in with a "That's what she said!" joke during the deleted scene at the end of the episode, making both of them laugh.
Ryan's inability to talk to Stanley's clients causes him to burst into mirthful howling about how he sounded like his 6-month old niece while driving back to the office.
Of course, let's not forget his reaction to Scott's Tots.....
Michael's rapid-fire roast at the end of "Stress Relief" does manage to get a good one out of him.
The Koi Pond incident causes him to join in the office's mocking of Michael.
The meatball prank seemingly has him enjoying Dwight's misfortune of having his desk overloaded with meatballs. It turns out it's actually at Jim's gullibility for donating free food to him and Dwight.
And lastly, the Dunder Mifflin billboard defacement involving a compromising position between Dwight and Andy.
Berserk Button:
Michael in general. Especially when it's revealed that Stanley's stress level goes up just by Michael coming near him.
Taking any notice of his daughter is sure to rile him up. He exploded at Ryan after seeing his daughter hanging around him.
Big Eater: Besides Kevin, he's probably the character who enjoys eating the most.
Black and Nerdy: He reads hentai at work.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Downplayed. Stanley is referred to on at least one occasion as the salesman with the most consistently high sales at Dunder Mifflin (while Dwight and occasionally Jim can outsell him, Stanley has been with the company longer). However, he is genuinely lazy:
In 7x05 "The Sting," Michael is, for once, trying to do his job as a manager and calls a sales meeting that is actually about sales. Specifically, he asks his sales team to come up with ways to beat Osprey, a small rival company that has been taking many of Dunder Mifflin's clients. Stanley's only contribution is to suggest that they "sell better."
A similar example occurs in Season 9 when Stanley is literally unwilling to do his job and renew a contract with a client for whom he is the primary contact (it's his sister-in-law's friend). Notable in that this is one of the rare cases for Season 9 Andy where Jerkass Has a Point; Andy directly states that Stanley has to go make the sale, and Stanley says no because he doesn't want to take the stairs.
It's heavily implied that, due to his longevity, Stanley has a steady stream of returning customers and simply places those orders every month, quickly reaching his commission limit and then only coming to the office because he's required to be there. He is only seen putting in effort when the commission cap is lifted and he can make more money.
Captain Oblivious: In the opening of "Costume Contest," the office tests the limit of Stanley's obliviousness, including Kevin being dressed as Phyllis and Michael talking about a branch on Jupiter. The only thing he notices is when the main clock is slow at the end of the day.
Catchphrase:
"Have you lost your mind?!"
He tries to make "and shove it up your butt!" into his new "thing" in Season 8, but it doesn't pop up regularly from that point onwards.
The Comically Serious: Part of his character is his reactions to the wacky hijinx around them.
Deadpan Snarker: Stanley's primary role in the office, especially towards Michael.
Enemy Mine:
He doesn't make it a secret that he doesn't like Michael but the moment someone cuts in line on Pretzel Day, they team up and jeer at them until they go away.
He also hates Dwight, but will side with him anytime the sales staff are put at odds with the other employees.
Enraged by Idiocy: Having to put up with any office antics irritates Stanley to no end, especially bad considering who his boss is. Downplayed considering that he rarely explodes into anger and simply reacts with a sardonic tone or annoyance, though it's occasionally played straight.
Former Teen Rebel: Was a civil rights activist in his youth.
Hidden Depths:
He actually knows how to have fun, as we see in the Florida story arc.
As seen in the finale, he's also skilled at woodcarving and was fond enough of Phyllis to make her a doll.
"WUPHF.com" gives us a particuarly bizzare example when he reveals his lifelong dream — to escape Earth in an space-faring lighthouse.
I Was Quite a Looker: In "Weight Loss" Stanley shows a picture of himself in the '70s, when he was a handsome Afro Asskicker-looking Black activist.
Jerkass: Stanley's grumpiness and abruptness with people regardless of how polite they are make him this. There's also the fact that he's cheated on his wife several times.
Jerkass Has a Point:
His brutal teardown of Michael in "Did I Stutter?' is understanding given the fact that Michael is inappropriate with the staff and acts extremely childish.
Had Michael given the same talk to Stanley right after the initial "Did I Stutter" incident as he did at the end of the episode, all of that drama could have been avoided. Stanley is correct that Michael's childish behavior has a tendency to escalate and make things worse.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: As rude and unpleasant as he is, Stanley still has a soft spot for Phyllis and Jim, and is terrifyingly protective of his daughter. Phyllis herself even claims that Stanley is a lot nicer when off-camera.
Manipulative Editing: In "Finale", Phyllis claims that Stanley is a much nicer guy than the documentary made him look, suggesting this took place. The fact that he was much nicer and more tolerant in earlier seasons lends some credence to this. His and Phyllis' intention to always help Jim when he Jim planned to leave Dunder Mifflin also affirms this view.
The Mole: When Stanley becomes Jim's new partner with pranking Dwight, it's in fact a ruse to have Jim use immense amounts of meatballs in his pranks that Dwight and Stanley then split and keep for food.
Not So Stoic: Downplayed, as he isn’t so much a Stoic as he was a man who just did not give a shit, but there were some times where he most certainly did give a shit.
As mentioned below, he flipped out at Ryan when he thought the latter was flirting with his 14-year-old daughter.
When Michael told everyone that Meredith was hit by a car and in the hospital - but was still alive - Stanley chews him out for making it sound like her injuries were fatal.
He was not happy when Michael pretended to fire him in ‘Did I Stutter’.
Stanley lit up real good when Michael spread the word that the former was having an affair. Just look at how enraged he is while smashing Michael’s car.
OOC Is Serious Business: Normally, Stanley is an extremely lazy, unemotive man who's completely apathetic to everything around him. This means that when he gets mad, he's terrifying — just ask Ryan. On another approach to this, the moments where he finds something genuinely hilarious all tend to be big emotional moments.
Papa Wolf: He goes ballistic when he thinks Ryan is having some funny business with his daughter.
Perpetual Frowner: He very rarely ever smiles.
Race Lift: Malcolm, his counterpart in the UK version, is White.
Scary Black Man: Normally averted. Stanley usually just doesn't care enough to be scary or intimidating, even when annoyed. But when his temper gets pushed to its limits, he becomes downright terrifying as seen in "Take Your Daughter to Work Day" when he thought Ryan was making advances on his daughter. Ryan stated afterward that Stanley yelling was the scariest moment of his life. Also notable in "Did I Stutter?" when Stanley lays out a savage "The Reason You Suck" Speech on Michael and Dwight, friggin Dwight, is clearly unwilling to throw himself into the path of Stanley's wrath for him.
Serious Business: Pretzel Day. It's the only time he's happy to go to work.
Soul-Crushing Desk Job: Apart from Jim, he's the most vocal about how much he hates working at Dunder-Mifflin and can't wait until he can retire. Any time he's given the chance to goof off or go home early, he grabs it by both hands.
Spared by the Adaptation: A nonlethal example. His UK counterpart Malcolm is made redundant, whereas Devon White - instead of Stanley - is the one who gets downsized.
Stereotype Flip:
Michael drafts him for the office's basketball team under the belief all Black people are good at the sport. Much to his bewilderment, Stanley turns out to be a terrible player.
For the series as a whole, Stanley flips the general societal stereotype that Black men are hip and high energy by being a very no-nonsense white-collar worker.
Straight Man: Tries his best not to engage in the antics around him.
This Is Gonna Suck: His standard reaction to any office antic. A good one is given after he returns from the hospital after having a stress-induced heart attack and gives a talking head about how continued stress will kill him and realizes Michael intends to force him to move about the office in a wheelchair:
Stanley: (in a second talking head) I'm going to die.
Token Minority: He’s the sole African-American who works in the Scranton branch's office suite until Darryl is promoted to Warehouse Supervisor and moves there from the warehouse.
Trademark Favorite Food: He loves Pretzel Day.
The Unapologetic: Doesn't give a crap about anyone's feelings or the damage he does to them.
Weirdness Censor: To the point where Jim and Pam convinced everyone to do the most outrageous random things they could think of for an entire day just to see if Stanley noticed. He didn't. Not even when he was sitting the wrong way in a meeting, or his computer was covered up. As he left for work, walking by such highlights as Dwight with a donkey right in front of his desk, Pam wearing a fake mustache, he didn't seem to acknowledge a single thing. Considering his usual attitude, it is entirely possible he did notice but chose not to acknowledge any of it.