Adaptational Attractiveness: In real life, the woman upon whom the character is based looks like this. From this lady, to Laura Prepon. Although in the book, it's mentioned repeatedly that she is not conventionally attractive, but was appealing because of her charm and extravagant lifestyle.
Aloof Dark-Haired Girl: Rarely shows sincere emotion to anyone beyond Piper, has black hair (with blue streaks and occasional Bettie Page bangs in flashbacks), and is described by Larry at their first meeting as 'tall'.
All Gays are Promiscuous: Alex originally cheated on her previous girlfriend with Piper before breaking up properly to be with Piper.
Betty and Veronica: The "doing X on a beach in Cambodia with three strangers in drag" Veronica to Larry's Betty.
Bookworm: The only character whose reading material is comparable to Piper with eclectic tastes from Mark Twain's work, international authors such as Haruki Murakami up to Jorge Luis Borges on her bookshelf as seen when Polly was invited to her apartment for a party.
Break the Haughty: Getting thrown back in prison, and killing someone sent by Kubra, made her much more vulnerable.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: Manipulating Piper into joining an international drug ring, naming Piper in her indictment and lying about it, and ultimately cutting a separate deal with the prosecutor for release for her testimony after convincing Piper to lie under oath. The last one burns back though, as the case collapses thanks to a screw-up by the prosecutor, and she is forced to live in fear of retribution. Piper then betrays her back, revealing her plan to skip parole and gets Alex arrested again. Stopped when both of them work past their issues in seasons 3 and 4.
Closet Key: Alex is this for Piper.
Dark and Troubled Past: Alex grew up in a poor single-parent household, constantly teased by the wealthy children at her school and never knowing her father. When she finally got to meet him as an adult, she found out that he was a drug-addled, womanizing rock musician who was more impressed that his daughter turned out with "a great rack" than anything else.
Deadpan Snarker: Best summarized with her first non-flashback appearance, where she walks up to Piper after having not seen her for five years in the prison Piper more-or-less believes Alex is responsible for putting her in while Piper is having a breakdown and deadpans, "I'm guessing now's a bad time to say hi."
Disappeared Dad: Her father was a "rock god" her mother romanticized an encounter with; when she met him as an adult, he mostly talked about how awkward it would have been if they'd accidentally had sex while complimenting her breasts, much to her shock and disappointment.
Easily Forgiven: For naming Piper when she got caught and, later, extending Piper's sentence.
Eerie Pale-Skinned Brunette: In flashbacks and in Season 1, and while she sometimes trades on it after returning to prison, she becomes less so.
Embarrassing Nickname: Growing up, she was called Pigsty by the Alpha Bitch and her posse.
Expy: Of Catherine Cleary Wolters. The character of Alex Vause is loosely based on Catherine Cleary Wolters, ex-girlfriend of Piper Kerman, the author of Orange Is the New Black: My Year in a Women's Prison and an executive consultant on the series.
First Girl Wins: She is the first lover seen involved with Piper at the start of the series (flashbacks and all) and ends up married to Piper after everything in the series.
Hidden Depths: She's initially depicted as a manipulative sociopath who exploited Piper and wrecked her life, and it's a long time before we're given a good reason to think differently. "Fucksgiving" implies that she's secretly insecure and probably has abandonment issues, while "Tall Men with Feelings" shows that Piper really did break her heart, and at just about the cruelest moment possible.
It's All About Me: Alex tends to think of her own needs first, considering others to be secondary.
Lipstick Lesbian: Unlike Piper, she exclusively prefers women, and like Piper she's traditionally feminine.
Momma's Boy: Alex adored her Struggling Single Mother, Diane, and is devastated when she dies in her backstory.
Manipulative Bitch: Especially noticeable in her relationship with Piper, although she more or less grows out of it once she kills Aydin.
Official Couple: With Piper, although only really starting from Season 3 when she's back in prison, and it gets solidified in Season 4.
Prison Rape: Averted. She threatens Pennsatucky with this, although she doesn't mean it.
Properly Paranoid: Double Subverted. Initially, it seems like she is right about Lolly being sent by Kubra to kill her. She is wrong. Then, however, it's revealed that one of the new guards is working for Kubra, who very much wants to kill her.
Put on a Bus: Quite literally in Season 2. After testifying against her drug dealer acquaintance in the premiere, she is released from prison, albeit with great restrictions to the point where she never leaves her house, and doesn't appear again until the last 4 episodes of the season.
Raven Hair, Ivory Skin: Luschek describes her as 'the hot one' of her and Pipe, and the dark hair and pale skin combination does undeniably work for her.
Slap-Slap-Kiss: Literally with Piper at the start of season 3.
Street Smart: Vause may not have a college education and though she is largely self-taught and not as theoretical as Piper but can have good conversation with just about anyone on books and literature, she is very observant, perceptive, good at reading people and has excellent practical intelligence. Piper went through great lengths to make Red's lotion to make amends but Vause only had to rub Red's feet for 45 minutes and she was able to eat just the next morning whereas Piper got her reward after a few days. Vause is Piper's intellectual equal whereas Piper is more bookish and creative, she is more efficient and practical.
Tsundere: Towards Piper, she has "harsh" as her main setting, but she can also be pretty controlling towards her when she needs to.
These Hands Have Killed: After killing Aydin (Kubra's hitman) by suffocation, she goes through a long period of guilt and paranoia, almost confessing to the crime in the end. In season 5, she confesses that she's killed someone to about 20 inmates, but doesn't give specifics.
Vague Age: Piper, according to the storyline, met Alex "ten years ago," when the former was in her early twenties (although already a college graduate). When Polly meets Alex, she says the latter is thirty and has too much money for her age. Which would make her at least forty by the time of the show, which she does not look like. Either Alex has aged extremely well, or Polly was being mean (their actors are only four years apart in age).