Abhorrent Admirer: Portrayed as this to Piper in the earliest episodes of the show, before her character became more developed.
Accidental Child-Killer Backstory: The reason Suzanne is in jail: she tried to make friends with a little kid and took him back to her house without realizing she was essentially kidnapping him. When the boy got freaked out and tried to leave, she wouldn't let him, which led to him running out on the fire escape and falling to his death.
Beauty Inversion: With her creepy stare and wild haircut, Crazy Eyes is seen within the show as one of the most terrifying-appearing characters. This◊ is what Uzo Aduba actually looks like in real life.
Because You Were Nice to Me: Vee is able to manipulate Suzanne to such a high degree basically because she was the first person to treat her with kindness and respect in the prison.
Butch Lesbian: She's a lesbian, and she has a distinctly masculine aspect about her. She's definitely not in the least bit feminine.
Character Tic: As seen in her page image, she has a habit of making the old "two eyes" gesture at random moments, as if to say "I've got my eye on you". She finally explains it to Piper in "Fool Me Once": it's her way of signaling to the guards that she has her behavior under control, and that she doesn't need to be sent to the psych ward (as she has been many times before). Suzanne also has a habit of hitting herself in the head when she gets agitated or feels that she has messed up somehow.
Characterization Marches On: She was introduced as a predatory lesbian who had had a number of prison wives in the past (to be fair, that description came from Healy), who behaved decidedly sexually around Piper, and not only there. Her orientation isn't brought up at all in the second season and in the third we learn that Suzanne is actually a virgin and thus is anxious about having sex when a (very) willing would-be prison wife appears.
Cloudcuckoolander: Justified, she is a Mood-Swinger and often acts like a child, because she suffers some kind of mental disorder.
Creepy Good: She is friendly and well-meaning, but so weird that Piper is fully excused for being scared of her. Unfortunately, Suzanne is also vulnerable to bad influence, so the "good" part is less accurate in the Season Two.
Cryptic Conversation: Suzanne often tries to express what's really going on to people, but she really can't communicate well.
Dark and Troubled Past: Suzanne has struggled with mental illness ever since she was a child, and she was treated like an outcast by nearly every child her own age that she ever met. Her adoptive parents, while loving, seemed to be in denial over the fact that their daughter may have had special needs.
The Dragon: To Vee in season 2.
Dumb Muscle: Suzanne considers herself this for Vee.
Suzanne: She's the brains. I'm the muscle.
Excrement Statement: One of her earliest character-defining moments involved her casually urinating on Piper's bunk floor shortly after Piper had turned down her advances. Although in this case, it's ambiguous whether she meant it as an insult or as just another sign of affection.
Expository Hairstyle Change: After she comes under Vee's influence, she replaces her Bantu knots with similar braids.
Friend to All Children: As an adult, her fun and energetic nature made her likable with children, though it helps that Suzanne has something of a child's mentality, herself.
Hair-Trigger Temper: While her exact disorder is not defined, it leaves her with a low tolerance for frustration.
Happily Adopted: Subverted. Her Caucasian parents are shown to be loving and supportive if a little overbearing. Hovever, their constant encouragement to do great left a violently repressed resentment from the extreme pressure given her, and it's also implied that they were in denial about Suzanne being different from the other kids, as exemplified when a mother of Suzanne's younger sister's friend protested about the ten-years-old Suzanne being brought to a party for six-year-olds. While Suzanne's adoptive mother did defend her daughter to another mother, it's clear that the other woman wasn't objecting to Suzanne being black, but instead reasonably suggesting that a girl who had hit puberty didn't belong at a sleepover for 6-year-olds. Perhaps Suzanne's parents overcompensated for the fear of their daughter being rejected for her skin color, while neglecting other aspects of raising a healthy child, such as encouraging her to have friends of her own age. There's also the fact that they seemed to delegate their parenting responsibilities towards Susanne onto their younger daughter once she reached adulthood, ignoring that Susanne, while capable of holding down a job required more supervision and care than a 22 year old could provide her.
Hidden Depths: Apparently has a deep appreciation of Shakespeare (she's read Coriolanus and Measure for Measure), she's been shown writing poetry, and she's likely taken some ballet classes, shown in her (Played for Laughs) talent show audition. The episode "Tall Men with Feelings" deconstructs her rather comedic role in the show so far, as she talks about how horrible the conditions in the psych ward are, how angry she gets about her own lack of self control, and how much it confuses and hurts her that people call her "Crazy Eyes". Basically, she is legitimately mentally ill and needs help, not prison. This is, unfortunately, Truth in Television for the American prison system today. This Frontline documentary is, at the date of editing, 10 years old, but no less true today than it was then. The video still works, despite site appearances.
Inconsistent Spelling: Is her name spelled "Suzanne" or "Susanne"? Both tend to be used interchangeably.
Insane Equals Violent: She hallucinates, is sometimes delusional, and can be very violent; she's in prison for accidentally killing a child.
In-Series Nickname: In the early seasons, she was almost always referred to as "Crazy Eyes." Following widespread complaints from fans and disability advocacy groups that the nickname was offensive, however, this was dropped at the start of Season 4.
Large Ham: Especially when declaring Shakespeare to a tour group of young delinquents. But her gestures and expression are generally very dramatic and once she even managed to pee on the floor in a hammy way.
Lonely Rich Kid: Surprisingly, her (white adoptive) parents seem to be quite wealthy and she had no friends except her sister.
Love Makes You Evil: Her (platonic) love for Vee and her romantic love for Piper makes her act even more impulsively and cruelly in the beginning.
Most Writers Are Writers: She starts writing a fanfic-style saga about sex and aliens. It becomes wildly popular, eventually leading to an In-Universe Why Fandom Can't Have Nice Things.
My Beloved Smother: Her mother is this to her.
Noodle Incident: Played with. She mentions a traumatic violent episode with her neighbor, never touching on it again, but giving further credit to her instability. However, this is implied to be the Accidental Murder that landed her in prison.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: She's capable of violent emotional outbursts. In defense of Vee, she beat Poussey down, nearly breaking her ribs. When provoked in a high stress situation, she also beat Kukudio to a pulp.
Perpetual Smiler: And her smile looks positively psychotic, if not quite a Slasher Smile.
Scary Black Woman: Played with. At first, she's a straight example, then it becomes clear she has many layers and a surprisingly soft side, but she's still scary because she can and will beat people up. Then it becomes clearer that her 'scariness' is more a matter of perspective.
Stalker with a Crush: Toward Piper, who she locks onto pretty quickly. Gets one to herself in season 3, when her erotic fiction takes off.
Suddenly Shouting: As shown when Piper uses her to deflect unwanted attention. She quickly starts shouting that Piper is her wife.
Took a Level in Jerkass: A tragic example. As of Season 2 under Vee's "parenting", Crazy Eyes has gone from mentally unstable but well meaning to actively malicious. While somewhat unhinged, Crazy Eyes wasn't particularly violent in Season 1. Once she becomes Vee's enforcer, she starts to physically beat and humiliate the people Vee sics her on. Of course, this is all under Vee's influence and manipulations.
Took a Level in Kindness: After her character got more developed and she breaks free of Vee's influence after Vee's death, it's clear by Season 3 onwards that she wants to do the right thing, although she's still very easy to manipulate.
Unwitting Pawn: Vee acted as a friend and motherly figure, but to her, Suzanne was decidedly a pawn to be used and thrown away when necessary.
Womanchild: Rogers describes her thought-process as similar to a child's, as she responds to positive and negative reinforcements in a similarly infantile fashion.
Yandere: A pretty unhinged case, obsessing with Piper to the point of following her everywhere and acting cruelly when spurned. She gets over it after a while however.