Anyone Can Die: Overdoses on heroin in Season 7.
As the Good Book Says...: She frequently justifies herself with (often incorrect or out of context) quotes from the Bible.
The Atoner: In Season 2, she tries to turn over a new leaf. And again in Season 5, when she wants to own up to her mistakes and be decent during the riot.
Ax-Crazy: In season 1, Pennsatucky is utterly batshit insane. She shot an abortion clinic worker for 'disrespecting' her.
Bait-and-Switch: Boo is shocked that Penn knows of the word "hijab", implying that Penn has studied Islam. Turns out she knows the term from a bigoted pastor who used it in an anti-muslim hate speech.
Beauty Equals Goodness: Her Heel–Face Turn is accompanied by getting a new set of pearly white teeth.
Becoming the Mask: Prior to prison (prior even to her trial), Tiffany was a nihilistic meth-head on her fifth abortion who murdered a nurse solely for "disrespecting her", and was misinterpreted by pro-lifers as one of their own. She quickly bought into her own press and became a legitimate holy warrior.
Big Bad Duumvirate: Of the first season, with Healy. She's the most openly antagonistic toward Piper.
Big, Screwed-Up Family: Every time she mentions a family member, she says "My [Relative], who is in prison over in [State] ..." Doubles as Running Gag.
Blackmail: After she's transferred back to Litchfield, during a visit from Linda, she uses some sensitive information on her to get transferred to Florida.
Book Dumb: She's uneducated which becomes tragically deconstructed in the final season, when she reminds her father and her classmates calling her "stupid" in the past.
Character Development: Begins the series as a fanatical religious fundamentalist who despises gay people, transgender people, non-whites, Catholics, Buddhists, etc. In later seasons she goes on to become best friends with Big Boo (a butch lesbian), helps Nicky (a Jewish lesbian) through detox, and befriends Suzanne (a black lesbian). She also goes from a volatile woman with violent mood swings to a much more even-tempered woman who is typically friendly to her fellow inmates. Further, she confronts her self-centeredness and egotism and faces terrible insecurity, takes steps to improve herself, and then overdoses out of despair when she believes she's too stupid to succeed without accommodations for her previously-undiscovered dyslexia; her last scene shows her ghost disappearing into the afterlife, having let go of mortality completely.
Churchgoing Villain: In the first season, and very militant about it.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: Becomes this to the childlike and unstable Suzanne in the last two seasons.
Con Artist: Even after her Heel–Face Turn, she's still collecting money from the extremist Christians who think she shot the nurse to support the pro-life cause.
Crisis of Faith: She has a brief one after being in the psych ward.
Dark and Troubled Past: She grew up in a pathological family where she was taught from an early age that rape was normal, among other things.
Deep South: Pennsatucky's character strongly evokes the Bible Belt, although her accent is more Appalachian than Southern.
Does Not Understand Sarcasm: Or rhetorical questions. Pennsatucky is… not a clever woman.
Drugs Are Bad: She has lost almost all her natural teeth to methamphetamine addiction, and it's implied that she miscarried the one child she decided not to abort, due to drug use. She also relapses in Season 7 after (wrongly) thinking she failed her GED exam, ultimately dying in the process.
Egocentrically Religious: At first. Pennsatucky clearly only took on fundamentalist beliefs so she can get a lower jail term for killing an abortion doctor, and she has a very blatant It's All About Me interpretation of the Bible.
Establishing Character Moment: While not her first moment on screen, her first episode with extended screen time starts off with her being forced to carry her own cross out of the chapel.
Everyone Has Standards: She shot one person who "disrespected" her and tried to kill another and for a time acted like a violent psychopath condemning anybody on her way to hell. But she can't bring herself to rape a man with a stick despite being his victim.
Foreshadowing: Her fellow prisoners joke she should get new teeth for Christmas; that very Christmas she gets them punched out of her head by Piper. She gets them replaced early in Season 2 with shiny new ones as an incentive by Healy to keep her quiet about his inaction toward said beatdown.
Framed for Heroism: She goes through a villainous variant in her backstory (see Villain with Good Publicity). She gets hailed as a hero by a Christian fundamentalist group, who assume that she murdered an abortion doctor because of her religious convictions. They have no idea that she actually killed the doctor over a petty argument, and that she was going to the clinic to get an abortion herself (her fifth abortion, in fact) when it happened. Her conservative Christian lawyer is happy to keep the charade going, knowing that Pennsatucky is a much better pro-life poster child if her followers don't know the truth.
Friend Versus Lover: Expresses some resentment towards Linda for her relationship with Big Boo, describing Boo as her best friend and criticizing Linda for straining that friendship.
The Fundamentalist: Pennsatucky is viciously and aggressively religious, although she often misses the point of the very sermons she espouses.
Good Feels Good: In Season 4, after she's assigned to be the water lady for the prisoners digging in the trenches, she finds that she likes the work because she feels like she's making other people's day better by bringing them water when they're hot and tired, while their sincere thanks warms her. This leads her to help Nicky detox when she's going through withdrawals, even giving her puke bags and buckets.
Good Girls Avoid Abortion: She's had five abortions (and a miscarriage which may have been related to drug use), and regrets them. She was in the clinic for abortion #5, but remembers a conversation she had the night before with her boyfriend/husband/whatever the hell he was, and pulls the IV out. She takes his gun and shoots the nurse that was tending to her because of a snarky comment the nurse made about how many abortions Ms. Doggett has had. The pro-lifers protesting outside the clinic believe she did it to support their cause though. As a result, they give Pennsatucky legal aid and support during her trial and while she is incarcerated for the shooting. Shortly thereafter, Pennsatucky became The Fundamentalist. During the Mother's Day episode, she is seen making little cross memorials out of Popsicle sticks, with names on them. Big Boo convinces her that by aborting them, she spared them miserable lives and spared the legal system more criminals to deal with, and that pulls her out of her funk.
Hair-Trigger Temper: During the first season. Healy helps her grow out of it toward the end of the second season.
Heel–Face Turn: Over the course of Season 2, she makes a concerted effort to turn over a new leaf and in Season 3 she largely succeeds. She's still casually racist and homophobic, but she's no longer as hateful, virulent or murderous. Over time she eventually sheds her prejudices too after becoming friends with LGBT inmates or those of color.
Heteronormative Crusader: After being "born again" she became militantly anti-gay. A lot of her dislike for Alex and Piper stems from this. However, over she sheds this, becoming friends with Boo, who's a very butch lesbian.
Hidden Depths: You couldn't be blamed at first for thinking she's a flat paranoid-fundamentalist stereotype. If you read between the lines, though, it looks like she's just desperate to be liked and respected by others, and simply pursued that end in horribly wrongheaded ways because of her mental instability. Season 2 shows that she might be self-aware enough to realize this and course-correct. Season 3 delves into her harsh upbringing, developing her further as a person, and she's shown to be a friendly nice person underneath that.
Holier than Thou: Despite being a crazy, meth-addicted killer Pennsatucky looks down on the other inmates who she doesn't consider sufficiently holy.
Honor Before Reason: In Season 5, she shoots off Leeann's finger and lets Coates escape. The inmates put her on trial, and Boo miraculously convinces the jury to let Penn go. Despite this, Penn decides to repeatedly proclaim her guilt, resulting in her getting locked in the porta potty for a good portion of the season.
Important Haircut: At the end of Season 2. It shows her commitment towards her being The Atoner.
Innocent Bigot: Definitely not innocent in the first season, but leaning that way in the third, if her cheerful dialogue how crack is "for coloreds — sorry, African Americans" is any indication.
Jeanne d'Archétype: Subverted, but she sees herself this way. One of the inmates even calls her out for this.
Jerkass Has a Point: During Season 2 she actually makes a few good points when people tell her to stop screaming and cursing with her cohorts, furiously retorting that she is expressing her frustrations in an open, healthy alternative to violence.
Lie Back and Think of England: The message she has received from her mother at the tender age of 10-years-old: you will get raped from time to time, just hope it will go fast. She takes this to heart, and we see her do exactly this twice when men rape her.
"L" Is for "Dyslexia": Finds out she has dyslexia in the final season and that's the reason why she was always struggling at schoolwork. Sadly, this leads to her tragic death when she believes she failed her exam.
Messy Hair: And not in a fashionable, Unkempt Beauty way.
Misery Builds Character: As Boo tells her, Pennsatucky is "one of the few people made better by coming to prison."
Nice Girl: From season 3 onwards, she's one of the nicest characters. She even becomes sort of a "big sister" to Suzanne and is very patient around her.
Not-So-Harmless Villain: In early appearances she seems to just be an idiotic fuck-up, and she is… but that doesn't mean she isn't extremely dangerous, as Piper learns.
Odd Friendship:
She gradually develops a sincere and strong friendship with Big Boo, who's her antithesis, to the point of them being Heterosexual Life-Partners by Season 5. She also develops one with Healy, who she bonds with over their shared distrust of lesbians. In Season 4, she helps Nicky withdraw from drugs.
Occurs again in season six when she and Suzanne become a quasi detective duo. Pennsatucky seems to genuinely like Suzanne and she, in typical Suzanne fashion, is happy to have the company of anyone.
Parental Neglect: Her mother forced her to drink an entire bottle of mountain dew to make her hyperactive in front of the family social worker and thus receive more money to help with her 'problem child'.
Politically Incorrect Villain: Aside from being homophobic, she's also fairly racist. Over time though, she gets more friendly with people of color and LGBT inmates, shedding this.
Prisons Are Schools: She suffers from dyslexia and as a result is almost illiterate. While in prison, she studies enough to earn her GED, although she doesn't live long enough to know it.
The Power of Hate: Pennsatucky initially embodied this trope, hating everyone, especially queer people and people of different races.
Rape as Drama: She has suffered at least two rapes at the hands of men that we know of.
Sweet Polly Oliver: During her brief time on the run in season 6 she puts on a very convincing disguise as a young boy.
Sweet Tooth: Pennsatucky is revealed to adore Mountain Dew and Double Fudge Chocolate ice cream, which her mother stuffed her with. She's also shown accepting candy in return for sexual favours.
The Talk: When she got her first period at age 10, she was completely unaware of what was happening to her, as (not believing that a girl that young could begin to menstruate) her mother had not told her anything. She thought she was dying. After getting over her initial shock, her mother explains that she's not dying, this is a normal process...and also that boys only want one thing, and will stop at nothing to get it, and she'll just have to take it and hope it goes quickly because that's normal too. Pennsatucky is raped at least twice in her life.
This Means War!: When Piper turns down a baptism (in a dirty sink) as a way to make peace, Pennsatucky matter-of-factly states, "That's it. She disrespected me. Now I've gotta kill her."
Took a Level in Kindness: In Season 2, particularly the latter half. She joins Healy in an effort to be calmer, more positive, and less bigoted. She's even better in Season 3, where she may be one of the prison's nicer inmates at that point.
A Tragedy of Impulsiveness: In the final season, she'd have gotten a happy ending if she'd just waited for her GED test results to come back instead of assuming she failed.
Villain with Good Publicity: Downplayed and for a certain value of 'good'; Pennsatucky regularly gets fan-mail and had a throng of pro-life extremists at her trial because she murdered an abortion clinic doctor (though not for the reasons they think she did). Note that her admirers are hardly pillars of society. Even Pennsatucky is a little off-put by their "fire and blood"-esque ravings.
Villainous Friendship: With Healy, though their friendship strengthens when they both become less villainous.
What the Hell, Hero?: In one of her more humanizing moments, Pennsatucky gives a fairly understated What the Hell, Hero? to Piper after her gas-lighting and the subsequent torment she underwent.
Do you realize that you almost ruined my life? I mean, do you? You made the Almighty God into a joke, and a joke ain't nothing to me. A joke didn't write me letters up in here, and a joke didn't give me hope so I could do my time and make something out of it.