Adaptational Attractiveness: Surprisingly—given how Chapman's appearance stands out in prison holding the Hollywood standard of beauty—averted. The real-life Piper is the only one of the original main three (her, "Alex" and Larry) who shares definite physical resemblance with the on-screen character based on her.
All Gays are Promiscuous:
When she hooked up with Alex in college, she was shocked to discover Alex already had a girlfriend but Piper then continued to pursue Alex after she broke up with her girlfriend.
In prison, Piper cheats on Larry with Alex. Alex pokes fun at this trope when she asks "Are you cheating on me and Larry with Crazy Eyes? Because there is not room for the four of us."
In season 4, she gets bored of Alex and cheats on her with new inmate Stella.
All Lesbians Want Kids. Subverted. At first Piper wanted a kid. Only after babysitting her niece does she change her mind.
Analogy Backfire: Piper is very skilled at this due to being well-educated and well-informed, and possibly owing to her narcissism.
Black Cindy compared her to Inspector Gadget when she provides proof that the transistor radio that she nicked during her absence from the Litch had her prison number on it. Her meticulousness showed when she reacted negatively by being compared to that character when she said that he was never a good detective and would never have gotten anything done without his stuff.
After Suzanne briefly interrupts her intimate moment with Vause in the chapel while consoling her after Tricia's death, she teased them by singing "Vanilla and vanilla swirl" she muses that it may not be a swirl when they're of the same flavor.
Larry angrily tells Piper that it extremely difficult for him to live in their house that still has a lot of her stuff and tells her that "It's like living in a sarcophagus." Piper acquiesces to Larry's resentment and anger but added insult to injury when she said that it's supposed to be mausoleum and not a sarcophagus to which Larry yelled at her for her callousness. Bonus points to Larry for saying that Piper is not the sun while he is the moon hence undermining his capacity as a person in regards to her.
Aesop Amnesia: From the pilot onward, Piper never learned her lesson or keep her promises not to do certain things. Up until being branded in season 4 and the prison riots in season 5 did she learn her lesson to be a better person though.
Anti-Hero: Obviously, since she is the main character of a series which takes place in a prison.
Author Avatar: Of Piper Kerman.
Badass Boast: Gives one to Soso.
"We are not friends. I am not your safety blanket. I am not your new Meadow. And, I definitely don't need your advice. I am a lone wolf, Brook. And a vicious one. Don't make me rip your throat out with my teeth."
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: Chapman seems like nice enough lady, but there's certainly a very dark side to her. She even spends some time commenting on how should feel worse than she does over actions, and fears what this makes her. She's prone to some introspection about whether prison made her colder, or if she was always that way.
"I'm scared that I'm not myself in here and I'm scared that I am. Other people aren't the scariest part of prison, Dina. It's coming face-to-face with who you really are. Because once you're behind these walls there's no where to run, even if you could run. The truth catches up with you in here Dina and it's the truth that's going to make you her bitch."
Bookworm: Piper is one of the few characters after Rory Gilmore whose show's fan base made the critics and the viewers intrigued as to what is in her reading list. It is mentioned by Alex that this is one of the things that attracted her to Piper, with Vause having veritable taste in her reading material herself.
Break the Cutie:
A sheltered, upper-middle-class white girl being thrown in a cage with psycho lesbians, murderers, and religious fanatics? It was an inevitability.
Even worse in Season 4 when Maria has a swastika branded on her arm for associating with neo-Nazis, as well as framing her for the panty business. Piper gets burned again so the swastika is now made to look like a window. At that point, it was more Break the Haughty though.
Break the Haughty: What Maria and her gang does to Piper and her panty business in Season 4.
Comedic Sociopathy: Her trying to sell Soso to Boo for a blanket is played for laughs, especially her underwhelmed reaction when a shocked Soso calls her out on it.
Corrupt the Cutie: Much of Piper's change in behavior to that of a typical inmate is a result of her own actions after entering prison.
Dark and Troubled Past: Not to an extent some other prisoners suffered, but it's there. Piper had to spend most of her adolescent years plainly aware that her parents didn't love each other. When she was 13, she caught her father kissing another woman while she was sneaking out to see Dazed and Confused with a friend; when she tried to tell her mother about it, her mother ignored her husband's infidelity and instead punished Piper for seeing an R-rated movie.
Deadpan Snarker: She can be quite sarcastic and tends to do it with wooden facial expressions.
Depraved Bisexual: Piper is very selfish and overtime uses her bisexuality to her advantage to get what she wants. She is willing to cheat with as many partners (male or female) to deal with some circumstances or gain the upper hand and "take back her power". And not afraid to give handjobs to the male prison guards for food.
Didn't Think This Through: Piper's main problem. Let's start with the fact that she just took Alex at her word in Season 2 about not testifying, then starting a white power group.
Digging Yourself Deeper: Arguably Piper's whole arc is full of this. For example, starting a panty-selling business? Probably not a great idea with a prison corporation breathing down your neck. Starting a white power group to cover up said business? Horrible idea. (As she does later figure out.)
Ditzy Genius: She's more book smart than most of the other inmates, but definitely not street smart, especially compared to Alex. She's very thoughtless and careless.
Fish Out of Water: To say that soap-selling Pablo Neruda- and Robert Frost-studying Piper doesn't fit in to the prison frame of mind easily is... an understatement.
The Friend Nobody Likes: By Season 4, while she's allowed to sit with Red and Co., it's pretty clear that no one really likes her or goes out of their way to invite her to social events anymore, since she got Drunk with Power over her panty business. By Season 5, everyone except Alex's default attitude towards her is exasperation and annoyance.
From Nobody to Nightmare:
Went from being a yuppie white girl to a cold-hearted Godfather of a prison panty empire, going so far as to frame Stella, her then-interest, for contraband after discovering the latter stole her money. Alex notes this when Piper starts talking about finding ways to covertly distribute money to her employees.
Continues this into Season 4, hiring muscle and starting a white power group to achieve her goals. She does regret the second one though.
Granola Girl: Attempted to be this out of prison, adopting different diets and setting up a soap company.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: Invoked. Although Piper does try to be a Nice Girl at first, this mostly seems like a projection by Healy and Suzanne among others, as Piper becomes less nice as she has to fit in at prison.
In-Series Nickname: In prison, she acquires several other nicknames throughout the series.
"Crazy Eyes" calls her "Dandelion" because she is tall and blonde.
"Pennsatucky" refers to her as "College".
Tricia refers to her as "Brain" because she is more educated than most of the inmates.
Innocently Insensitive: Frequently. While her current situation is hardcore by the standards she's always lived with, most of her concerns in prisons are seen as First-World Problems by the rest of the inmates.
Intrepid Reporter: Becomes this in Season 2, looking into the prison's financial irregularities under the guise of starting a newsletter.
I Should Write a Book About This: In season 6, she gets the idea to write a memoir about her experience in prison. She is released from prison by the end of the season.
It's All About Me: Not nearly to the extent of her best friend Polly, but she definitely displays qualities of being self-absorbed, a flaw that Alex constantly reminds her of. It isn't that she doesn't care about other people or their problems, more that she gets so wrapped up in her own drama that she has tunnel vision.
In the first season, she was engaged to Larry and had an affair with Alex due to loneliness, telling both of them that she loved them and ended up breaking both of their hearts; she inadvertently twists the knife by trying to run back to Alex once Larry breaks up with her for good. In the second season, she complains that her hurt feelings should be in the forefront when Polly and Larry get together once she and Larry break up despite the fact that she has feelings for Alex and spent the second season growing more distant from Larry. Moreover, part of the reason she gets Alex thrown back into prison is because she wants Alex back with her. Piper's feelings are certainly valid; she just doesn't have a good track record with putting her partner's before hers.
Nichols has to call her out on this in the second season, when Piper cares more about getting a visit from Alex than she does about Red getting hospitalized.
Larry also calls her out on this during the Valentine's Day episode.
Larry: That makes you the sun? You're the center of the solar system and I'm just the dead hunk of rock?
She continues this trend throughout Season 3 and 4, only beginning to lose these qualities after the collapse of her business and getting a swastika burned into her arm.
Jerkass: Becomes this more and more throughout season 3, especially in regards to her callous and self-absorbed behavior with Alex.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She gradually gets better after her Jerkass Realization in season 4, and is much more pleasant in season 5 and 6.
Lack of Empathy: Slowly evolves into this. In the second season she's so far gone she tries to pimp Soso out for a blanket and doesn't even seem to understand why the other girl is shocked and appalled, instead 'excusing' her actions by saying that 'is so fucking cold in prison'. This increases in season 3, to the point of mocking Alex for being rightfully scared that Kubra will have her killed. She realizes this in Season 4 and attempts to fix her relationship with Alex and her bunkmate.
Manipulative Bastard: By her own admission, Piper comes to realize that she is manipulative, but she uses her talents in the pursuit of saving her own ass masterfully, making back cream to smooth things over with Red, re-opening the track after accidentally leading to Watson getting sent to solitary, and all but coercing Fig to get her a marriage form.
Mark of Shame: Gets a swastika burnt into her arm in retribution for creating a white power group and framing Maria for her panty business. She gets Red to burn it into a window to fix it.
Masochism Tango: With Alex. For how often the two lie, cheat, backstab, breakup and makeup, show a callous disregard for the other's feelings, and even ruin each other's life since, by Season 3, both Alex and Piper have gotten the other thrown in prison even though the other was making a life outside, one would think they would get tired and pick another dance partner. They finally patch things up in Season 4, and get engaged at the end of Season 5
Misery Builds Character: Getting jumped and branded by Maria's gang makes her much nicer in the second half of season four than she had been for a long time. From then on she shows more interest in other people's lives, and sympathy for their struggles, than perhaps any time in the series.
My God, What Have I Done?: Goes into this after her plan to run Maria out of business turns into a white-supremacist group...which was not what she intended.]
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Even when Piper tries to do good, she can't help messing it up; her articles about being in prison backfire, and so does her attempt to comfort Red by telling her that her store is in business when it's been shuttered.
Noodle Incident: The Season 3 finale indicates that her sentence was extended at some pointnote , but it's never stated whether this was for her brawl with Pennsatucky, her act of perjury in Kubra's trial, or something else entirely.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: The very last scene in Season 1 is of a desperate Piper repeatedly punching a downed Pennsatucky in the face after the latter assaulted her with a sharpened wooden cross with intent to kill.
Official Couple: With Alex from Season 3, though it's not solidified until Season 4 after she cheats with Stella.
Only Sane Woman: At least she thinks of herself that way. For the first few weeks this might even have been true, but prison life soon turns her as antisocial as most other inmates.
Out of Focus: In Seasons 2-4 she's still important, though she no longer dominates the main plot. In Season 5 her role is noticeably reduced and peripheral to the main plot until the last few episodes.
Pet the Dog: She has a few such moments such as when she comforts Soso when the latter is crying in her bunk.
Sanity Slippage: Implied; we still have no idea whether the chicken or the voice Piper heard in SHU are real. In the Season 2 premiere, Piper starts talking about her painting made of rotten egg yolks, Thirsty Bird, among various other incidents during Season 2. Vaults straight into Nightmare Fuel. Though, it is shown in Season 3 that the chicken is real and gets in and out of the prison through a hole in the fence.
Sex Goddess: Both Alex and Larry admit to Piper being really good in bed a couple of times.
Slowly Slipping Into Evil: In Season 3 with her panty-selling business.
Skewed Priorities: She has a pretty bad habit of not thinking long term. In "The Chickening", after going through a lot of trouble to set up a conference call regarding her and Polly's business, she drops it so she can chase after the legendary chicken. When the other inmates begin to resent her after she gets a furlough to see her dying grandmother, she tries to give it back and needs to be reminded that her grandmother is dying.
Small Name, Big Ego: Suffers this hard in season 4. She sets up one prisoner to be transferred to max for stealing from her panty business and acts like it makes her the coldest, baddest bitch who ever went to prison. As Maria tells her, things won't go well when an "actual hard-ass bitch decides to call [her] on it". She does, and they don't.
The Sociopath: While Piper doesn't commit (overtly) villainous acts during the first three seasons, her profile is starting to fit the bill more and more:
She does not only gradually become unable to take other people's emotions and situations into account, she has trouble grasping the fact that they may exist (at least until someone else spells it out for her). And she is largely unaware or in denial about her Lack of Empathy.
At one point (namely when cheating on Alex with Stella) she just decides she is not going to feel remorse for her immoral actions. Just because.
She starts displaying a tendency for lying and manipulation, which admittedly probably has been implanted in her by her family upbringing.
Her need for stimulation and inability to truly commit to people really raises its ugly head when she dumps Alex for Stella, literally because Stella is new, hot and interesting, and Alex with her depression and (justified) fear for her life has become tiresome for Piper.
Teacher's Pet: A prison version.
She is a CO's pet, as Healy goes out his way to play favorites with her by not punishing her for being responsible for the chicken hunt (though several other inmates, who took part in it, suffered consequences), choosing her as a WAC representative and granting her a furlough which was 'the first miracle ever seen' by another character. To be fair, Piper doesn't really crave any special attention from him and the furlough was a result for something else than Healy's favoritism, but it doesn't come unnoticed by others and occasionally makes her an object of resentment.
She attempts this in Season 4 with Piscatella. It works for a bit when she tattles on Maria's gang and gets Maria framed for the panty business, but eventually, Piscatella gets fed up with her.
Took a Level in Jerkass:
Gets colder during the second season after getting transferred back. Soso is annoying, but threatening her after she needs comfort and trying to trade her to Big Boo for a blanket definitely shows how far she's come since the first season.
She gets much worse in the third season. She is generally much more comfortable by lying and using people than before. She cheats on Alex—without the justifications of feeling overwhelmed and meeting a long-lost love, which she may have had when cheating on Larry. This time she just thinks that the terrified-for-her-life Alex is boring and Stella is hot so it's okay. She also executes a petty revenge on a girl who was just representing everybody's interests in having some profit from their contribution to Piper's panty business (long story) and delivers the mother of Disproportionate Retribution to another girl who has stolen from her. It's safe to say that by the end of the season she may count as a Villain Protagonist.
Took a Level in Kindness: After being brutally attacked and having a traumatic tattoo scarred on her arm, Piper realizes what an asshole she's been and does this.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: While she does have her genuine trauma and problems, the show makes it very clear that she's a whiny white-girl-privileged person compared to the more minority women, and plays her complaining for laughs. As Larry notes, she also has a nasty tendency to stick her foot in her mouth when nervous.
Uptight Loves Wild: Although becoming less uptight in prison, Piper is still pretty uptight, and was even more so in her backstory, when she loved the wild drug-dealing Alex.
Villain Protagonist: In season 3 and early season 4. By the end of Season 3, she isn't actively villainous in a sense of wanting to harm anyone (who hasn't crossed her first, that is), she has hit the heights of Lack of Empathy and isn't hesitant to crush anyone who gets on her bad side. She isn't even present at the final heartwarming scene when the other inmates visit the lake; the last we see of Piper this season is her alone, power-drunk and content with being in a prison, giving herself a vanity tattoo. Throughout Season 4, we see the ramifications of her trying to be a badass and top prison bitch. The rest of the inmates either don't care, don't take her seriously, or want to bring her down. Plus, she inadvertently starts a White Power movement. She gets better.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Polly.
White Anglo-Saxon Protestant: Self-admitted. She also claims it comes with great tradition of Stepford Smiling.
Wrong Genre Savvy: Piper loves the fear and respect (she thinks) her panty business affords her as "the top bitch" in Litchfield, until that same power makes her a target for tougher, more experienced bitches who want to usurp it.