Acrofatic: Despite her larger body type, she does an impressive splits in Season 2's "You Also Have A Pizza."
Badass Bookworm: Taystee becomes especially badass in Season 5 after Poussey's death, and she loves books.
Best Served Cold: Rather than take personal revenge on Cindy for lying that she killed Piscatella, Taystee opts to do perhaps something even worse by informing Cindy's daughter of the truth about her parentage, destroying any chance of going back to her old life after getting paroled.
Big Fun: She is big, fat, energetic and always ready to goof around.
Black and Nerdy: She works in the prison's library (which she can navigate perfectly) and is very protective of Harry Potter books. It's also implied that she read Ulysses (or tried to, at least). Season 2 flashbacks show she is incredibly talented at calculating business transactions on the spot in her head.
Broken Bird: After Poussey's death.
Burger Fool: In a flashback Season 2, we see she held a fast food job in the past.
Character Development: From a goofy Big Fun, to crack-selling "Well Done Daughter" Girl, to the care-taker and informal leader of her group. By Season 5, her work during the riot to see justice for Poussey's death and better conditions provided for all inmates has led her to become a natural leader and one of the few leader figures in prison to operate on noble causes.
Chronic Villainy: Shortly after being given early release, she returns to prison towards the end of Season 1 because she found civilian life miserable and extremely difficult to survive in.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: Often tries to be this to Suzanne, but any of the black girls can take this role.
Dark and Troubled Past: Taystee was trapped in the foster-care system until she was 10, and she got pulled into drug-dealing by her manipulative surrogate mother figure Vee. When she's briefly released in Season 1, it becomes clear that Vee is the closest thing in the world that she has to family.
Deadpan Snarker: She can be pretty sarcastic, and her and Poussey's take-down of 'white people politics' is a masterpiece.
Driven to Suicide: In Season 7 firstly as the result of finding out that the courts don't even consider her appeal to be worth hearing, and then later on after the one ray of hope that she does get — Suzanne's testimony — is dashed after her lawyer tells her that any remotely competent prosecutor would utterly destroy any credibility that Suzanne would have as a witness. However, on the first occasion she loses her nerve and is unable to go through with it, and the second time she ends up finding Pennsatucky's own body first, distracting her long enough for other events to eventually restore her will to live.
Foil: To Piper. They're the first two characters we see, and their backstories end up being almost mirror images of each other. Piper grows up privileged and lets Alex drag her into the drug trade so she can have a wild, adventurous life; Tasha grows up poor and lets Vee drag her into the drug trade because Vee's "family" promises her a stable domestic life.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Poussey. Well, on Taystee's part.
The Heart: In Season 5, she consistently brings up Poussey and that everything they do should be to honor her.
Heartbroken Badass: After Poussey's death in Season 5, Taystee goes on a Roaring Rampage of Revenge solely to honor her.
Hidden Depths: She's a lot smarter than her attitude makes her appear. Several characters note she's become an informal legal expert and counsel to the other prisoners. Subverted when she's paroled, as she has no idea how to use these valuable skills on the outside.
Incompatible Orientation: Taystee is straight, which means she can't reciprocate her best friend Poussey's feelings.
Important Haircut:
She styles her distinctive bouncy mane of curls into much more conservative cornrows soon after Vee reenters her life, forcing her to face some of the darker aspects of her past that she'd rather ignore.
In a minor example, she has her hair straightened in one episode of the third season; by Danita, showing her abandonment of Sophia.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!:
In Season 5. After getting the promise of having all of the possible demands of the prisoners met in season 5, her Revenge Before Reason streak concerning Bayley leads her to abandon the negotiations, which combined with the untimely release of the hostages by Maria leads... well, straight to hell.
Her penchant for revenge hits her at the worst possible moment once again in Season 7, when after discovering that Cindy hid the truth about Piscatella's death, she sends a letter to Cindy's family explaining the as-yet undisclosed situation regarding Cindy's sister actually being Cindy's daughter. This leads to Cindy leaving home shortly after the discovery. Later, Taystee is told Suzanne's testimony wouldn't be enough on its own, due to her unique mindset making it easy for a prosecutor to get any testimony from her thrown out. Due to her involvement in blowing up Cindy's family out of revenge, her lawyer is unable to make contact with Cindy to get her to provide testimony instead.
Only Known by Their Nickname: To the point that even the guards know her only as "Taystee", and Suzanne only learns her name in the fourth season.
Guard over PA system: Inmate Tasha Jefferson to the warden's office. aside Who is Tasha Jefferson? Oh, Taystee! Taystee, go to the warden's office!
Suzanne: Your name's Tasha?
Only Sane Woman:
In the third season. Between: Poussey descending into alcoholism, hunting squa-coons (yes), crying over smutty novel and joining a cult; Suzanne becoming a prison-famous writer because of creating said novel, dealing badly with Vee's disappearance and generally being, well, Suzanne; and Cindy and Watson antagonizing other prisoners and being as unhelpful as usual, Taystee raises to the Team Mom of her group.
In the fifth season, too. Although she does participate in the riot, she remembers Poussey and makes sure she is remembered throughout.
Revenge Before Reason: In the riot and in Season 7, when she gets Cindy kicked out of home, which means she can't get the testimony she desperately needs.
Sad Clown: Miss Claudette points out that she uses humor to make everyone miss how concerned she is about life outside of prison.
Sassy Black Woman: Arguably the sassiest in a prison with no shortage of such characters.
The Scapegoat: Ends up taking the fall for Piscatella's death thanks to CERT setting up the prisoners, with the first episode of Season 7 establishing that she was sentenced to life without parole.
Team Mom: Reluctantly takes this role in Season 3, though she doesn't realize it until near the end.
Theme Naming: With Poussey. Jefferson and Washington.
Those Two Girls: Never far away from Poussey.
"Well Done, Daughter!" Girl: Her relationship with Vee, and Miss Claudette susses this as a common pattern for Taystee.
What the Hell, Hero?: Gives one to Caputo when she finds out that he hasn't called the morgue to remove Poussey's body from the cafeteria floor, or the police to begin any sort of investigation, or even Poussey's father to notify him of her death.