Achilles' Heel: Barney is an incredibly gifted and competent person...but he also has a crippling weakness to alcohol. Just a sip of alcohol, or even non-alcoholic versions of boozy drinks, pretty much destroys him.
Addiction Displacement: During the brief period when he gave up alcohol, Barney became addicted to coffee instead.
Addled Addict: He's an alcoholic and is living a dysfunctional life apparently brought on by said alcoholism.
The Alcoholic: Barney started bad and got worse and worse as the show went on, to the point where he'd lick beer up off the floor while claiming he still had dignity. This got stale enough that he nearly ended up being written as "Who Shot Mr Burns" just to send him to prison for a while, but instead the writers swung over to him trying to fight his alcoholism. It depends on the writer as to how well he's doing in any given episode.
Alcohol-Induced Idiocy: As expected, he's done a few acts that can be attributed to this. It's generally portrayed that when Barney kicks the bottle he becomes insanely smart and capable. He was a genius in school before he took up drinking, and when he kicks the habit during Astronaut training he positively crushes it.
Ambiguously Bi: He complains when crowded in a closed bomb shelter that someone is touching him, but he's okay with it when he learns it was Skinner. He's also happy being the wife in a cult marriage to Otto, and has admitted he's in love with Homer, though whether that's gay, bi or Homersexual is anyone's guess. He has been shown attracted to and in relationships with women before.
The Artifact: Early in the show, Barney was Homer's best friend. However, when Lenny and Carl took over as Homer's main friends, Barney was left with little purpose and essentially became a background character. Later seasons attempted to give him additional relevance by having him give up drinking, but this didn't last.
Berserk Button: Ruining his beer or otherwise preventing him from drinking it will cause him to get enraged.
Beware the Silly Ones: One thing Barney can still do very well when he's drunk is fight. He knocked Homer out with one punch in an early episode, and a couple of seasons later did the same to Wade Boggs and Moe. The original version of his fight with Joe Frazier would have ended with him winning.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Quite a few episodes suggest that Barney is actually very talented: he easily produces the best film in Springfield's film festival, crushes Homer's plow business as the Plow King, proves the most talented singer in the Be Sharps, and gets through astronaut training without a hitch. One even suggests he could have gotten into Harvard if he hadn't started hitting the bottle.
Broken Ace: Barney is incredibly gifted at everything from academics to filmmaking to music to art to business management to athletics. Unfortunately, if he has so much as a sip of alcohol, or even non-alcoholic drinks that are usually alcoholic, he pretty much falls to pieces. He doesn't really care all that much, though.
Carpet of Virility: Type 2, with chest hair usually coming out the neck of his shirt.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: He is actually an exceptionally talented person when sober, being both surprisingly intelligent and athletic.
A Degree in Useless: In one episode Barney is seen standing in line at an unemployment agency. Barney claims that he hasn't been able to find a job in years, and when Kent Brockman asks him what his qualifications are, Barney replies "Five years of modern dance, six years of tap."
Disappeared Dad: His father is dead, according to the episode "Mr. Plow" ("Ah, dying's not so bad. I'll be reunited with my loved ones, my dad, and that plant I never watered."). Later we learn that Arnie Gumble was one of the deceased Flying Hellfish.
The Ditz: Justified, as he's usually drunk.
The Dog Bites Back: After constantly being landed on by Bart and his skateboard in the HD intro, "Dad Behavior" shows him taking his skateboard and breaking it in half.
Early Installment Character-Design Difference: In the first season, Barney was blond and wore an olive-green shirt with purple shoes. Starting with the second season, Barney was depicted as a brunette and wore an orange shirt with blue shoes.
Erudite Stoner: Or drunk, in this case. At a certain stage in his drinking, Barney can be surprisingly eloquent and thoughtful. This happens often enough that his friends describe this stage as "Professor Barney."
Fake High: When celebrating his victory over Homer to go to space, he drinks some champagne in celebration, which undoes all his sobriety efforts in under a minute. This confuses the scientist overseeing the tests, as the champagne was non-alcoholic.
Fan Disservice: Similarly to Comic Book Guy, his shirt is not quite big enough to completely cover his beer belly.
Fat Best Friend: Though it’s more obvious in early seasons back Homer’s only childhood friend was Barney, he’s still one of Homer’s best friends in spite of their occasional differences and disagreements.
Fat Idiot: Mostly because he drinks a lot. One flashback depicts him as Harvard-bound — until Homer gives him a beer.
Fat Slob: Except in the episodes where he's sober, Barney is portrayed as an alcoholic mess with a beer belly.
Fatal Flaw: His alcohol addiction is his biggest flaw that's preventing him from having a decent life, as he's shown to be quite gifted, but even one sip of beer will turn him into a wreck.
Flanderization: He was introduced as a Barney Rubble Expy who always hung out at Moe's. However, as Lenny and Carl filled in his role as Homer's best friend, his drunkenness was emphasized more in later seasons. In newer episodes, he's usually seen lying around in drunken stupor or hung over. He did sober up in Season 11, but the writers aren't very consistent about whether that stuck.
Gasshole: His signature belch is practically his catch phrase. See a compilation here. It even turned into the belching sound effect on the show.
Genius Ditz:
In "Homer's Barbershop Quartet" we learn that even though Barney has a strange speaking voice, he has a beautiful singing voice. This was likely inspired by actor Jim Nabors (better known as Gomer Pyle from The Andy Griffith Show and Gomer Pyle, U.S.M.C.), who despite his best-known character had a rich, baritone singing voice.
In "A Star Is Burns" he manages to create an independent film so moving that it drives the film festival judges to tears.
He Cleans Up Nicely: His hair is neater, his shirt tucked in, and his diction clearer when he isn't drinking.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He and Homer have been best friends since they were children.
Hidden Depths: Despite being a drunk, he created a short film about how his alcoholism has ruined him that became so popular that he was featured on Entertainment Weekly, has amazing drawing ability, possesses a beautiful singing voice, and teamed up with Linda Ronstandt for his "Plow King" commercial. When he's sober, he can fly a helicopter. What's worse is that Barney in his teens was a Harvard-bound honors student who became a drunk after Homer offered him a beer.
In the Blood: His belching ability is evidently his strongest inheritable trait, according to the gag in "Selma's Choice", where it's shown that all of the countless babies he's sired through donated sperm - sons and daughters alike - can all burp just like him.
Karma Houdini: In "Duffless", Homer manages to sneak out of work and go to the Duff Brewery with Barney. At the brewery, Homer and Barney both partake in free samples, with Barney consuming more than Homer. Barney is so drunk that Homer becomes the designated driver, and when Chief Wiggum, Lou and Eddie pull the car over, Homer does well on the sobriety test, which consists of touching his nose with his fingers while standing on one foot and reciting the alphabet. Barney, who is more drunken than Homer, tells the cops to use the breathalyzer on Homer, and as a result, Homer's license is suspended and he is ordered to attend traffic school and Alcoholics Anonymous meetings, while Barney gets off scot-free with no comeuppance in spite of his blood-alcohol content being noticeably higher than Homer's. To add insult to injury, when the cops arrest Homer and leave Barney to drive home, Barney runs his car into Wiggum!
Lower-Class Lout: He is an alcoholic, never seems to hold down a job for very long, is perpetually single, and lives in a run-down apartment.
Made of Iron: Barney shrugged off Homer punching him in the face, bashing him over the head with a crowbar, and repeatedly slamming his head with a car door. He's also survived crashing a jetpack, getting run over by a marshmallow truck and getting caught in the machinery of Moe's speakeasy.
Massive Numbered Siblings: The Season 4 episode "Selma's Choice" reveals he regularly donates sperm to the Springfield IVF clinic, which results in a panning shot revealing dozens, maybe hundreds of women marching out of the clinic carrying babies letting out Barney's signature belch, making their parentage obvious.
Meaningful Name: Barney spends most of his time in a bar. It may be a coincidence, since he is apparently named after Barney Rubble from The Flintstones.
Military Brat: His mother is a naval officer and his father was a Private Fifth Class in the Flying Hellfish.
Must Have Caffeine: He actually managed to sober up for a few seasons, but he switched his dependency to coffee. Moe promptly started serving it to keep making money off Barney's addictions.
Naked People Are Funny: Went streaking at the Springfield High School senior prom in 1974, had his diaper blown off (in bone-chilling winter weather) while passing out flyers for a baby furniture store called "Lullabuy$", woke up naked when the Springfield Cat Burglar was terrorizing the city, and took a job as a male stripper when Mr. Burns replaced everyone who worked at the nuclear plant with robots because The Full Monty taught him that, during times of economic hardship, ugly people will strip for money (and if that doesn't work, he can always play "Three-Card Full Monty" where players have to find his penis underneath one of three shuffling hats).
Nice Guy: Despite his alcoholism, Barney is overall well-meaning and friendly.
Off the Wagon: Barney is shown as being trying to keep his alcoholism under control often enough for it to matter that he usually isn't.
One-Steve Limit: An interesting variation with the recurring "Barney's Bowlarama". Originally Barney was to be the proprietor, but the creators couldn't plausibly visualise someone like Barney being able to run the business. As something of a Mythology Gag, the Bowlarama is run by his Uncle Al Gumble in later episodes, and in Tapped Out, placing the Bowlarama unlocks Barney.
Pink Elephants: Literally (although they also fit the trope). One of them is named Stampy (no relation to the elephant Bart got as a pet) and protects him from demons who don't normally appear in his alcoholic hallucinations (like the ones he saw when he drank the peyote-spiked hippie juice Homer was churning out).
Promotion to Opening Titles: He gets added to the intro in Season 2, as Bart skates past him. The HD intro instead has him passed out under a pile of leaves.
Singing Voice Dissonance: Although he has a slurred speaking voice (from years of drinking), Barney has a beautiful singing voice (much like Jim Nabors).
Smarter Than You Look: Was studying for the SAT exam, hoping to go to Harvard, when Homer introduced him to beer. He started drinking more as a result of his high school girlfriend Chloe leaving him to pursue her journalism career.
Status Quo Is God: In a rare subversion on the show, Barney sobered up in Season 11 and stayed that way for nearly three years. These days whether he is drunk off his ass or sober depends on what would work better for the plot.
Straw Loser: His alcoholism was flanderised to the point that he was pretty much stripped of every scrap of dignity. He finds out in "Days of Wine and D'oh'ses" that his friends at Moe's see him as a "tanked up loser" and, after Barney decides to give up alcohol, they try to make Homer the new Barney, because every bar needs "a world class drunk. Someone who makes our alcoholism seem less raging".
Too Dumb to Live: Once charged a tab to Mr. Burns. He later woke up in a landfill.
"Yeah, but it was worth it."
Trash of the Titans: His apartment is such a mess that he can't even find his dog.
"He's in here somewhere."
Undiscriminating Addict: Barney is primarily an alcoholic, but when shot with a tranquilizer dart in "Much Apu About Nothing", he pulls it out to drink the rest of the liquid inside. During the few years he stopped drinking alcohol, he switched his addiction to coffee instead.
What Did I Do Last Night?: Barney's gotten so sloshed (even by his standards!) that he's forgotten everything from crossdressing at his own birthday party to making a film so popular it got him on the cover of Entertainment Weekly.