Apathetic Teacher: Edna has completely gone to town on this trope. She and Bart still bond a lot more than either of them would like. Later episodes Subverted this by revealing that she retains the ideals about improving young minds that she held as an Enthusiastic Newbie Teacher and, though she's been beaten down, would nonetheless rather teach than do anything else. When she leads the teachers' strike it's out of a real desire to give students a higher-quality education, which puts her in contrast with Skinner, who feels that Springfield Elementary's students are doomed regardless of how the budget is applied.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: She develops a secret romance with Seymour Skinner, a relationship that almost leads to marriage. Since then, Krabappel's attitudes to Skinner have vacillated between passion and disdain in various episodes. Until she broke up with him, married Flanders, and pretty much forgot about Seymour.
Brain Bleach: She inspires this with Bart when her talent show act is a striptease: singing "Fever" while dressed in nothing but inflated balloons, popping each one during the song. The audience is also shocked by her act with 1 or 2 audience members enjoying it.
Lisa: (as Homer is eating an armful of concessions) Dad, you were supposed to pay for those snacks.
Homer: I saw Krabappel's butt, I paid!
Broken Bird: Her husband left her for "something small and fluffy down a rabbit hole" and Bart Simpson is one of her students. It's a miracle she didn't kill herself or quit in disgust.
Catchphrase: "Ha!" It's even her epitaph.
Cool Teacher: She usually has the energy to teach her students, choosing to single out Bart mostly to keep her sanity, but there are times when she makes the effort to connect with him and he tries to do a little better for her sake.
Deadpan Snarker: Krabappel is a contender for being the most sardonic character to appear on the show, with the majority of her reactions toward everything around her quipping dry, sarcastic remarks.
Dub Name Change: In the European Spanish dub her last name is changed from "Krabappel" to "Carapapel", which means "paperface".
Dude Magnet: Krabappel appears to be desired by many men, as seen in Sideshow Bob's outrage (in "Brother from Another Series") wherein his romantic date with her is ruined by a spying Bart: "You only get one chance with Edna Krabappel!"
Even the Girls Want Her: "Rome-Old and Juli-Eh" has shown that even Patty is attracted to her.
Flanderization: Her defining traits in the early episodes were that she was fairly promiscuous, yet she was also a lonely, bitter divorcee, and was extremely apathetic and had no passion for her teaching job (though you'd be that way too if your husband left you for "something small and fluffy down a rabbit hole" and you had someone like Bart Simpson as one of your students). After she married Ned, she became nothing more than "Ned Flanders' wife" until her voice actress's death.
Friendly Enemy: To Bart in few episodes when he goes out of his way to emotionally support and help her in times of hardship. Much like Skinner, Bart only terrorizes her on principle, but clearly loves and respects her.
Hidden Depths: While she's burned out and cynical, she's one of the few teachers at the school who actually does care about her students' education (most obvious in The PTA Disbands, where it drives her disagreement with Skinner and therefore most of the plot.)
Hot for Student: Not as often as one would believe, but it was played with in various ways with Bart. One sad example is in "Bart the Lover", in which Edna mentions that Bart is the closest thing to a man in her life, but she finds that more depressing than disturbing. In "Future Drama", 18-year-old Bart nearly dodges a bullet when he and a then-single Homer double date Edna and Miss Hoover. In this example, she's all for it, but when Bart politely rejects it, she encourages him that both of them could do so much better with other people. The real icing on the cake, though, is in "Black-Eyed, Please". As a means to find out why the new teacher Ms. Cantwell hates Lisa, they send Bart in as a means of interrogation. Upon introducing him, Cantwell accuses her of this trope, to which Edna replies in full Sarcasm Mode.
Ms. Cantwell: Are you dating this boy?
Edna: Right. I can't be around him 'cause he's so delicious.
Hot Teacher: She was presented as Bart's attractive teacher mostly in Seasons 2 and 3 (she tried to seduce Mr. Bergstrom; Homer finds a provocative picture of her and tells Bart that he's going to start going to Parents' Night), but eventually this characterization faded, and she became more sarcastic and bitter.
I Was Quite a Looker: She is considered fairly attractive now, but part of her character is being a burned out divorcee in her thirties wondering where the time has gone. As a result we often see her outside of class trying to act like and wear the clothes she did in college.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She does genuinely care about her students. And for all their enmity, she really cares about and believes in Bart. When he proves he really did study to try his best on a test he failed, she decides this warrants extra credit and gives him just enough to pass fourth grade. After her death, her writings reveal she sees Bart's potential and truly wants him to succeed.
Killed Offscreen: She dies offscreen in the middle of Season 25's "The Man Who Grew Too Much", possibly involving Homer, according to Season 23's "Holiday's of Future Past".
Knight in Sour Armor: Her life dream was once to teach to young students; however, after years of teaching jaded her positive image, and after her husband left for another woman, their marriage counselor, Edna started drinking her days away. She got fired from teaching in a prestigious private school, and eventually made her way into Springfield Elementary. Beneath her jaded exterior, however, she's the only teacher at the school who (sometimes) shows genuine, serious concern for the students' well-being.
Lady Drunk: "Dinner for one, wine for three..."
Meaningful Name: "Krabappel" (pronounced cra-bappel) is clearly a reference to "crab apple", a species of apple notorious for its bitter, sour taste — and which is also used in America to denote a person who is extremely bitter, sour, cranky or generally bad-tempered.
Oddly, the only people that have ever called her "Mrs. Crab-apple" are the real Seymour Skinner in "The Principal and the Pauper" and Milhouse in "Milhouse Doesn't Live Here Anymore", where it is lampshaded:
Kearney: Crab apple?
Jimbo: I never thought of that!
Lampshaded again in "The Debarted".
Donny: Hey Krabappel, your name sounds like "crab apple"! Do you go sour waiting for someone to pick you?
Edna: Mmmm, pretty much.
Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places: Her terrible dating life and quick flings are the thing of legends. Under it is a rather lonely woman who just wants to be happy. She eventually finds Ned Flanders.
Mrs. Robinson: In early episodes, she is shown as very sexually aggressive and promiscuous.
Ms. Fanservice: Well obviously, if you look at "Hot Teacher". Such as doing striptease with only balloons, having revealing outfits etc
Noodle Incident: It is never explained how Edna exactly died, with the only implications being that Homer seemingly had something to do with it.
Passing the Torch: An indirect example. After her death, Ned takes over her job come Season 29... before Mrs. Peyton took over in Season 33.
Pet the Dog: One sign she's more than just a bitter, cynical teacher is after Bart fails his final test of the Fourth Grade. Initially dismissive, she's shocked when Bart is genuinely aggrieved because he genuinely tried and attempts to comfort him. When Bart blurts out an obscure historical fact, proving he's telling the truth, Edna gives him a bit of extra credit so he can pass, clearly proud of him.
Really Gets Around: Mrs. Krabappel has hooked up with quite a few people when she wasn't married or dating someone. Ned Flanders wonders if he should stay with her because of everyone she's been with. In Season 23, they marry.
Second Love: Ned's second wife after Maude's tragic death. Unfortunately, it wasn't meant to be.
Shout-Out: Her name is a reference to Miss Crabtree from the Hal Roach The Little Rascals films.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: She's eventually drawn to the upbeat, kindly Ned Flanders.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: She and Bart have a very contentious relationship based around him making her life difficult and her returning the favor.
Signature Laugh: "HA!"
Tormented Teacher: Mrs. Krabapple had to deal with Bart's disruptive antics, and apparently his misbehavior is so unruly that the teacher's union had to include a clause in their contract that no teacher who has Bart in their classroom will be held legally responsible if he dies while under their supervision.
Worthy Opponent: Bart doesn't intend to annoy her on purpose, but those times they get to really talk things out makes it clear they have a lot of respect for each other.