Academic Alpha Bitch: She prides herself on her intelligence and always coming top of the class with straight 'A's. One episode has her world collapsing when she gets her very first B; another deals with an even brighter girl joining her class and Lisa's utter jealousy of her, and another when she skipped a grade and was no longer the big fish in a small pond.
Academic Athlete: Although generally portrayed as unathletic and disinterested in sports, she has demonstrated considerable talent in certain athletic activities such as ice hockey, soccer, lacrosse, and even gymnastics. She was even interested in joining a football team (although she mainly did this to break the norm for her own sake) only to find out that there are already girls on the team.
Adorably Precocious Child: As sophisticated, intelligent, and worldly as Lisa may be at 8 years old, she has more growing up to do than she thinks, and so she is not above lapsing into childish behavior if the situation calls for it.
Affectionate Nickname: Her brother Bart often calls her "Lis".
Age-Inappropriate Dress: She's an 8-year-old wearing a strapless dress and pearls. She even lampshades it in "Puffless"; her substitute teacher in "Black-Eyed, Please" questions her about it.
Mrs. Cantwell: What eight-year-old wears pearls?
All Girls Like Ponies:
On her Christmas list, she listed "pony" over and over again. She finally got one in Season 3, "Lisa's Pony".
The moment she's at a country club, complaining about the snobs, and sees someone riding a horse. The predictable happens.
In "She of Little Faith", her family attempted to bribe her into converting back to Presbylutheranism by presenting her with a pony (but which is really Milhouse and Ralph pretending).
All Girls Want Bad Boys:
She had a crush on Nelson once. While he gets nicer in the future, they still have an on-again off-again relationship.
She's implied to have a crush on Jimbo Jones.
Parodied in one episode where she reveals her crush on a boy who works at the library. His "bad boy" behavior is pretty much limited to being annoyed at people who confuse the juvenile and young adult sections.
Lisa: Ooooh... if only someone could tame him...
Later she only becomes interested in Dogged Nice Guy Milhouse when he acts like Marlon Brando in A Streetcar Named Desire and is mean to her.
All of the Other Reindeer: Depending on the episode, when the writers want to evidence her "misunderstood outcast" status for the sake of the plot. In "Lisa Goes Gaga", she is voted the least popular student of the entire school.
All Take and No Give: A major flaw of Lisa's is that she believes that all her interpersonal relationships should be based solely around her own desires and worldviews, while the other party doesn't get the same consideration. Unsurprisingly, this is one of the main reasons she's unpopular with her peers.
Aloof Big Sister: Played Straight with Maggie but inverted with her older brother, Bart. After his Flanderization, Homer is very open with his favoritism towards Lisa, his negligence towards Maggie, and his disproval of Bart. As such, Lisa often outshines her brother and sister through her intelligence and sometimes feels threatened when her siblings starts showing signs of being better than her.
Always Second Best:
To Allison in the episode "Lisa's Rival" where Allison was slightly better than Lisa at everything, mostly slightly more knowledgeable and better on the sax.
Lisa's voice actress Yeardley Smith even remarked about how often Lisa would enter a contest and end up in second place; two notable examples are "Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington" and "Lisa the Beauty Queen". Also when she entered a cruciverbalism (crosswords) contest, she went to the finals and lost to Gil. In the spelling bee episode, she also loses to another kid in the finals.
Always Someone Better: A running gag. While definitely among the smartest in Springfield, Lisa is quite often overshadowed by various characters. At times, she can even be academically bested by Bart long after his Flanderization as a completely selfish idiot, such as in "Clown v. Board of Education".
Zigzagged with Bart, Depending on the Writer. At times, she secretly resents Bart for being Brilliant, but Lazy, street smart, and his other strengths. But, a season 27 episode that Bart been upstaged by Lisa since he was 6 and his resentment of her stems from his inability to be better than her at anything. Even in her earlier brattier days in the shorts, a running gag had Bart constantly bested by Lisa (and sometimes even Maggie) in his pranks and showboating.
To Martin Prince, her school rival in Science Fair. Even if Martin's IQ is 216 (Lisa's IQ is 156 or 159), she is often stated to be the smartest person in Springfield above him.
Maggie is clearly even more brilliant than Lisa at the same age, with Lisa more than once panicking at the idea of being usurped as the "smart one".
Ambiguously Bi: While she does like boys and had different boyfriends throughout the series, episodes set in the future depict her as taking an interest in girls. In the couch gag of "Holidays of Future Passed", Lisa is seen with a girlfriend in one photo and two different girls in another. In "Mr. Lisa's Opus", Lisa's roommate seems to want to be "more than a friend", but we never learn if Lisa's interested. In the credits of "Mother and Child Reunion" when Lisa asked if any of the vision of the future is true, the oracle (Nate Silver) said, among other things, that Lisa will have 47% chance of a boyfriend and 72% chance of a girlfriend, Lisa is ecstatic about the odds (not at all bothered about the possibility of being a lesbian). In "No Loan Again, Naturally," when Bart misunderstands the phrase "family outing" and claims that Lisa is gay, she doesn't refute it, saying that it only makes sense she'd want to be gay as several of her idols are.
Annoying Younger Sibling: Bart usually finds her annoying, though it's more common for Bart to be the one annoying Lisa. Lisa is also able to antagonize her brother on purpose sometimes.
Author Avatar: To creator Matt Groening concerning certain viewpoints of his.
Badass Bookworm: Depending on the Writer. Lisa is very intelligent and able to knock out her older brother.
Badass Pacifist: She uses words, speeches, blackmail, and trickery to deal with her problems. Later, however, she becomes a lot more willing to resort to violence.
Big Brother Worship: As a toddler, she absolutely adored Bart, to the point that her first word was her brother's name. The "worship" part went away over time, though she still loves her brother.
Big Fish in a Bigger Ocean: Lisa is Book Smart, but as she finds out the hard way by going up a grade, she's completely out of her depth regarding much harder schoolwork.
Blue Means Smart One: Inverted; Lisa is the smartest member of her family, but the only one whose character design does not include the colour blue (Homer's blue jeans, Marge's blue hair, Bart's blue shorts and shoes, Maggie's blue onesie and bow).
Book Smart: She is a hardworking bookworm who excels academically.
Borrowed Catchphrase:
Like her mother and siblings, Lisa's said "D'oh" when she's frustrated or upset by something. She's borrowed some of her father's other catchphrases by imitating him drooling over his favorite foods with his tongue hanging out, yelled "woo hoo!" when she succeeded at something and growled "Why you little..." before strangling Bart once.
In a couple of episodes from the earlier seasons, she sometimes borrows her mother's "Hmmmmmm...". In "Rosebud", she even says it along with Marge.
Brain Bleach: In "Whiskey Business", Lisa seems to need some after seeing Moe in disturbingly tattered clothes. Thankfully, it looks like it's minimal:
(Moe knocks at the door; Marge opens it and sees Moe in his ruined suit)
Marge: Moe? What are you doing?
Moe: Midge, uh, the suit got a little mussed up... But I gotta ask ya... Is it noticeable? (turns around and shows his butt)
(Beat.)
Marge: Thank God, the kids aren't here.
Lisa: I was.
Break the Cutie: Multiple times. One notable example is in "Milhouse Doesn't Live Here Anymore" when Bart and Lisa form a close bond, before Bart ditches her for Milhouse, causing her to start crying.
Bully Magnet: In the occasional episode where she is the target of bullying, has been the recipient of multiple reasons: because she is a nerd, because she doesn't follow the clique rules of other girl students, because she is not as pretty as the rest, because she's a blonde and the bully's initial assumption is that she is a Dumb Blonde, because she is a Soapbox Sadie and somebody got fed up with it... in one episode she even tries to discover what makes a bully constantly beat her up and she discovers that bullies are a Human Subspecies who have a natural drive to attack people who give off certain pheromones (like nerds).
But Not Too Challenging: She often complains about the lack of educational challenges at school, but she doesn't take it well when she gets anything other than straight A's.
Butt-Monkey: On occasion. Aside from Maggie, her family has become a bunch of idiots (with the exception of Marge, although she is frequently Not So Above It All in later seasons) and she gets bullied fairly often for being a nerd.
Bystander Syndrome: In "Postcards From the Wedge", Bart tries to avoid studying and doing homework by driving a wedge between Homer and Marge but resorts to destroying the school when Homer and Marge decide to neglect him so that they can preserve their marriage. Lisa knew about what Bart was doing from the beginning, but chose to do nothing rather than telling her parents about what Bart is doing. This example borders on Accomplice by Inaction.
Catchphrase: Lisa didn't have a catchphrase since the beginning of the show until she said "If anyone wants me, I'll be in my room.", which is said in the end of the episode "Bart Gets Famous". Lisa also said this in "Lisa the Vegetarian", "Grift of the Magi", and "Dude, Where's My Ranch?". She also frequently yells out a shrill "MOOOOMMMM!!!" in response to Bart's antics or "DAAAAAD!!!" whenever Homer says or does something stupid. And, of course, there is "Meh."
Characterization Marches On:
Throughout the Ullman Shorts, she is a disrespectful troublemaker and not particularly bright, much like her brother. The writers originally conceived her and Bart as something of an interchangeable duo of bratty kids designed to drive Homer and Marge crazy. As Bart became the rascally Breakout Character, however, the writers believed having Lisa as a female version of Bart seemed redundant, so they rewrote her as a brainy, yet socially awkward girl. However. season 1 has a mix of her two characterizations. While still a bit of troublemaker and generally plays along with Bart's antics, she is shown to be the more mature one between her and Bart.
In the early episodes, she was a big fan of The Happy Little Elves, while Bart preferred to watch Krusty the Klown and The Itchy and Scratchy Show (along with horror movies and, in the episode where Homer steals cable TV, X-rated movies). Later episodes either show both of them being childish, both of them being mature or, in a lot of cases, Bart being the childish one and Lisa being the more mature one.
Her artistic side arguably dates back to the development of the show, since her saxophone solo is part of the opening credits. Another case of this would be her rebellion against her music teacher Mr. Largo. It's part of the opening credits, and is emphasized considerably in a couple early episodes. Later, not only did Lisa avoid conflict with her teachers to the point of becoming a grades-obsessed teacher's pet, but Mr. Largo has been Demoted to Extra (and in some cases, Put on a Bus).
Her attitude towards school evolved from being a teacher's pet (telling Janey that 'school is never pointless' in an early episode) to a more rebellious and disillusioned attitude towards teachers who don't return her enthusiasm for learning ('Do you remember when you lost passion for this job?' to multiple school staff in one episode). However, this is zig-zagged and often depends on the episode - she still behaves far better in class than Bart, and gets incredibly hung up on getting perfect grades. As a general rule, she wants to do well in school but is less of a sycophant towards authority figures than Martin Prince is.
Early episodes showed her being friends with other average girls in her class, liking ponies, and having small sleepovers at her house. The later episodes established her as a sad loner who is very disliked, constantly bullied for being "smart", a very self-righteous Granola Girl, and always trying to find friends outside her school and joins environmental groups and MENSA.
Child Prodigy: She's eight years old and intelligent.
The Chosen Wannabe: In "Gone Maggie Gone", Lisa believed she was part of a religious prophecy that would bring world peace, only to discover that the prophecy was about Maggie.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: Not as much as Marge, but she's usually this when she interacts with her Bumbling Dad Homer. She's also the voice of reason for other characters as well.
The Conscience: Tries hard to be this for other people, both in the family and outside of the family, often calling out others on their behavior.
Cunning Linguist: She speaks Italian, with the help of Milhouse. She also seems to understand and know Swedish to a certain degree, as seen when Professor Frink won the Nobel Prize in "Treehouse of Horror XIV", however, this is only a non-canon source.
Cute Bookworm: She just loves books, libraries and reading.
Cutting the Knot: Averted; Lisa often overthinks situations or she forgets how young and naive she is. In "The Girl Who Slept Too Little". she gets scared of a nearby cemetery and develops problems with sleep. She doesn't realise until the end of the episode that she could have just bought a nightlight or closed the curtains.
Daddy's Girl: While her father is a complete idiot and often manages to embarrass her, she still loves him no matter what. In "Lisa's Wedding", she stops her own wedding because her British fiance was disgusted with her family (that, and he wasn't wearing her father's cufflinks. Which look like pigs.) Homer himself usually makes a bigger effort to support her compared to Bart or Maggie. He - not once, twice - sacrificed buying an air conditioner for his family to buy Lisa a new saxophone. And he sold his ride on the Duff Blimp to enter her in a beauty pageant when she was suffering from a lack of self-esteem. Several times, she comes to realize this and loves him back, though like Bart, mostly enjoys him as a fun (if anxiety-inducing) big brother.
Depending on the Writer:
Either she is the bright spot of the Simpson family and Springfield, or a self-righteous jerk who, despite her intelligence, can be as jerkish as the rest of the town.
Her emotional maturity and brilliance. While she had her flaws, she usually managed to learn from them. But as everyone got flanderized, she became quite a jackass and not as different from her family.
Though she is never popular, just how unpopular she is varies from episode to episode. In some episodes, she hangs out with Janey Powell and some of the other girls but in other episodes she says she has no friends with even Janey teasing her.
Her intelligence can range from her being a Child Prodigy (159 IQ, being part of MENSA, etc.) , having above-average intelligence for her age group (being a wise and intelligent kid, but with her flaws and defects), to only getting good grades because Springfield Elementary is a Sucky School with low standards (she struggles when she is moved to third grade).
Similarly, while they eventually settled on her being Buddhist, there was a time when Lisa could switch between a hard-nosed skeptic, Flanders v2.0, or a New Ager at the whim of the writing staff.
Her love for her family seems to vary as well, in some seasons she does love her family despite how much they embarrass her or make her feel like an outcast. Whereas, other times she's quick to abandon them for the greater good or for what she deems is a better life.
Whether or not she averts A Mistake Is Born: While Bart and Maggie were very much unplanned, the series flip flops over whether Marge and Homer actually intended to have her or if she was merely the only Surprise Pregnancy they were HAPPY about.
Her physical aptitude. Several episodes show her utterly failing gym class, and being far less physically fit than Bart, especially when they both enrolled in a military school. Yet, on other occasions, she has proven to be the stronger sibling, punching Bart out with one blow.
Descent into Addiction: Whether it's second-hand smoke, calling the Corey hotline, expanding her mypod playlist, or collecting pins, Lisa has an addictive personality and usually needs Bart or Homer's help to bail her out.
Divergent Character Evolution: Lisa started out more or less as a Distaff Counterpart of Bart (though, unlike Bart, she had a smart side and felt like an outcast compared to the other students). In "Krusty Gets Busted", we get the first evidence of the smart Lisa that we all know, as she agrees to help Bart clear Krusty's name.
Does Not Like Men: Downplayed. In See Homer Run, the school authorities believe that Lisa has a development disorder that will make her hate men for the rest of her life if Homer doesn't start acting like a father to her. While Lisa is known to be more aggressive to men, it's either because she and Homer have fallen out or it's because she's trying to prove herself to other feminists. When she's acting independently on her beliefs, Lisa believes women can take responsibility for themselves and the worst thing she'll say about men is that women can save themselves.
Driven by Envy: It's common for Lisa to feel threatened when someone appears to be smarter than her. In "Smart & Smarter" she developed a one-sided rivalry with Maggie when the latter's IQ test stated that she was smarter than her. In "Lisa's Rival", she has Alison's project sabotaged by Bart because she felt outshined by her classmate. She also tends to get jealous of Bart from time to time, especially when he actually outshines her academically.
Dude Magnet: Despite being a social outcast and generally unpopular, multiple boys have had a crush on her, including Milhouse, Ralph, Nelson, and many One-Shot Character love interests.
Enraged by Idiocy: Lisa is like this sometimes.
Lisa: (to Homer) You, sir, are a baboon! BABOON, BABOON, BABOON!!!
Even Nerds Have Standards: Lisa may be a classic nerd in a way but she has standards.
She can't stand pöpli.
She laughed at Bart for having a stamp collection.
She fakes having food poisoning to get out of Martin Prince's educational-themed birthday party in "Grade School Confidential".
Family Theme Naming: With her paternal grandmother, Mona Simpson. Together, their names create "Mona Lisa".
Fatal Flaw: Pride, Envy, and self-righteousness.
Pride: Lisa champions herself as the smartest in the family and the source of morals, so when she thinks her position is threatened by someone smarter than she is or she falls into jealousy, she quickly tries to reassert herself by sabotaging her rivals.
In Girly Edition, Lisa feels threatened and jealous when Bart becomes a more respected news anchor than her and she orchestrates an ambush between Bart and Groundskeeper Willie as punishment.
In Lisa's Rival, she sabotages Allison's diorama because she felt Allison was usurping her and wanted to keep her position as the smartest kid in school.
Self-righteousness: If Lisa believes she's in the right then she'll assume that she knows better than everyone else and act on her beliefs, no matter how complex the situation actually is or how everyone benefits from the fault.
In Pranksta Rap, Lisa figures out Bart faked his kidnapping to attend a rap concert and shames Bart, Homer, and everyone else for knowingly going along with the lie because everyone benefitted from it (Wiggum gained a promotion, Kirk gets well-fed and has fangirls, Homer profits off of merchandise, and nobody got hurt from the lie).
In "Lisa Gets An A" Lisa cheats on her literacy test and gets an A+++. Even though her cheating would benefit everyone in the school, she ultimately confesses her guilt from cheating and that the school was using funds they didn't earn.
First Kiss: A few episodes will toy with this concept for Lisa. For instance, when Nelson gave her a "Shut Up" Kiss, Lisa stated that it was her first kiss, despite being kissed by another boy in [[The Simpsons S1 E5 "Bart the General" Bart The General]].
Flanderization:
She started out as a decent little girlnote  who acted as the family's voice of reason, alongside Marge. As seasons went by, she became Little Miss Perfect: her largest vice, her envy, was ramped up to the point she was unable to accept when someone in her family/friend group was better than her at any given activity. Her sardonic view of society as uncultured, phony, pandering, and lowest-common-denominator-focused became extreme intellectual superiority and being Holier than Thou (as seen in "They Saved Lisa's Brain") and her quirkiness and nerdy interests became patronizing enthusiasm for the most pretentious of vocations (as seen in "Elementary School Musical" and "The Day The Earth Stood Cool"). She went from being a model child and the voice of reason (and therefore, Bart's contrast) to a stuck-up genius prude.
Lisa wasn't that brilliant or mature in the early episodes (for example, she believes in Santa Claus), but she was clearly quite an achiever for her age. However, over time, her intelligence was taken up to eleven, with her doing things like trigonometry while still in second grade and understanding fractions in a flashback to when she was three years old.
Every season progressively escalated her Soapbox Sadieness higher and higher. She started complaining about anything and everything that didn't meet such standards, her strong progressive streak became activist tendencies (as seen in "Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy," when she protested against the Talking Malibu Stacy's misogynist phrases like "Thinking too much gives you wrinkles" and "My name is Stacy, but you can call me ((Wolf Whistle)), then full-out environmental and uber-liberal extremism (as seen in "Lisa the Vegetarian," "The Old Man and the Lisa," and "Lisa the Treehugger").
While she had some friends in the early seasons, including Janey, who was the closest she had to a best friend, the Lisa of later seasons has become a friendless outcast due to the Flanderizations mentioned above. This is especially true in the episode "Lisa Goes Gaga", where she is voted Springfield Elementary's least popular student.
Foolish Sibling, Responsible Sibling: Bart and Lisa are among the most extreme and well-known examples. Bart is a Book Dumb mischievous troublemaker (Foolish) while Lisa is very studious, well-behaved, and respectful (Responsible).
Friendless Background: Glaringly enough Depending on the Writer. Some episodes have her spend time with one or a bunch of them, but then the next she's so incredibly neglected by her peers with the excuse she's too smart for them.
Friend to All Living Things: Given her activism streak and environmental appreciation, it's no secret that she has a tendency to befriend animals, mammals, and even insects for an episode. This extends to one of the show's promotional images, which depicts her balancing a caterpillar on her finger. The whole reason she became a vegetarian was because she bonded with an adorable little lamb at a petting zoo.
Funny Conception Story: "3 Scenes Plus a Tag From a Marriage" reveals she was conceived on the fire escape in Homer and Marge's first apartment, this being the only place they could go to avoid waking up Bart.
Future Loser: Much like Bart, she can be depicted as this in certain episodes. Notably, at worst, future Lisa is shown stuck in an unhappy marriage with Milhouse, comedically being more attracted to him when he was bitten by a zombie.
Generic Cuteness: She has some insecurities about her appearance and sometimes the other girls mock her for the same thing, but given the art style it is difficult to convey her as being any more or less attractive than the other girls on the show. Given the episodes that bring this up also discuss the issues with unrealistic beauty standards, it can be justified.
Genius Bruiser: As Clobber Girl, she keeps her genius intellect and gains Super-Strength.
Genius Burnout: She is academically gifted and has aspirations towards attending elite universities, but it can waiver. Flash Forward episodes waffle back and forth between her attending college in England, being President of the United States, or married to Milhouse while still living in Springfield. In "Future Drama" specifically, Bart accidentally messes up her college admission and makes things right so that she doesn't have to marry Milhouse.
Go-Getter Girl: Lisa goes back and forth between being this and acting like a normal girl.
Granola Girl: Starting in season seven's "Lisa the Vegetarian." She feels guilty about eating meat after bonding with a lamb at a petting zoo, which leads to her becoming first a vegetarian, and then an ecological activist over the series.
Green-Eyed Monster: Lisa's main flaw is that she's quick to jealousy whenever she feels outshined or when she believes her title as the smartest kid in school is threatened. In "Smart and Smarter", she runs away from home because she felt Maggie would do better without her around.
Guile Heroine: She's extremely clever and perfectly able to outsmart and manipulate her enemies like Mr Burns.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: She is blonde, and before Flanderization took over she was a very respectful and considerate person most of the time. Post-Flanderization, it's Depending on the Writer.
Hated by All: Zig-zagged; A recurring theme with episodes based on Lisa running for leadership always ends with Lisa losing the vote because of her low popularity. In "The Kid Is All Right", Milhouse tells her some of the kids do agree with her ideas, they just don't like her. Several adults are also annoyed by her piousness, sometimes ignoring her entirely. However, in a potential future, Lisa is able to become president and was shown to be a reasonable, successful figure.
Heel Realization: She has a tendency to be selfish about what she wants and judgmental about the intellectual quality of her family, but comes to realize how ungrateful she can be. In one episode she realized that while Homer sometimes takes her on outings she isn't that interested in, he still is trying to spend time with her. Likewise, Homer will take her to things she loves and he doesn't, while she acts embarrassed to be with him.
Holier than Thou: At times due to her Soapbox Sadie traits. The "a girl wants to play football" scene from Bart Star is a great example. She initially demands a place in the football team because it's male dominated. Ned welcomes her and points out that there are several girls already on the team. She loses interest, making it clear she was just pushing for affirmative action for the sake of it, and then tries to shame them for using balls she think are made out of pig skin to make herself look good, only to be told that their balls are synthetic and some of the money they pay for the balls is going to charity.
Honor Before Reason: Lisa is willing to bend the rules, but only if she comes to that conclusion by herself. If someone tells her to lie, cheat, or even just conceal the truth, she will refuse, even if lying, cheating or concealing the truth would be to everyone's advantage. Part of being an 8years old child and part flanderization.
Hypocrite: More often than the other family members, Lisa tends to become this, changing her stance on a cause in the very same episode. She claims she wants to be challenged, but whenever she finds herself challenged becomes sulky and resentful.
A prime example of this would be "The Secret War of Lisa Simpson"; she spends much of the episode complaining how she feels "unchallenged" at school (and seems to look down on the other kids because of her "intellect"), she then sees military school as the way forward. However, when she is rejected by the boys and made to really be challenged (not just mentally but physically), she's completely incapable of living up to it. When Bart calls her out on this, she outright claims she wanted a challenge she knew she could do, not one she could actually fail at, which completely negates the concept of a challenge in the first place.
Once after she cheated to gain a perfect score in a test, the school was awarded extra funding to buy some basics. But even after she confessed to Skinner and he requested she keep quiet for the school's sake, she confessed to the School Inspector, which ultimately would sabotage her fellow students' learning - regardless, her conscience was wiped clean. It's even more hypocritical on her when she sabotages anyone who has the Always Someone Better situation just to keep herself as the best.
One episode has her buying gifts for her whole family to enjoy for Christmas, but rather than buy them gifts they'd actually want, she buys them the type of gifts that make her feel like a better person, so of course none of them like them. She becomes angry at their "ungratefulness", but thankfully Bart sees through her true intentions and soon calls her out on it; she quickly remedies it after though.
When Todd Flanders has a crisis in faith, Lisa gives him a thumbs up after he tells the First Church of Springfield congregation he doesn't believe in God anymore. Lisa then tries to convert Todd to Buddhism, and he calls her out on it.
She and the narrative treat Sherri and Terri in particular as awful jerks for shunning her for being different or only pretending to like her. However, she often thinks very little of them herself even when trying to approach them. She will also happily shun Ralph for being too different, and usually cares very little when Nelson and his fellow bullies pick on Bart and the other boys, even encouraging the bullies at times.
I Can Change My Beloved:
In "Lisa's Date With Density", she falls for Nelson, gushing out how dark and mysterious he is and insisting that only she can change him. Subverted when Lisa comes to realize that she could never change Nelson.
In "Lucas", she inexplicably falls for a hopeless boy who wants to be a competitive eater (despite Bart's warning that he's just "Ralph Wiggum with a dream") and then thinks about changing him. Marge fears that Lisa goes out with him because he reminds her of her father.
I Can't Dance: She can do jazz dancing (as seen in "Lisa the Beauty Queen"), but she's terrible at tap and ballet (as seen in "Last Tap Dance in Springfield" and "Smoke on the Daughter").
Idiot Ball:
A surprising number of examples, like running up hundreds of dollars in charges to a 900 number, spending the time she should have been studying for a test playing a video game (and then cheating to pass it), and downloading $1,200 of music on her MyPod. Then there's "Lisa The Simpson", where she's led to believe that she's biologically predisposed to be like this (and finds out in the end that it's actually Bart's cross to bear).
Played for Laughs in "Bart of Darkness"; the Simpsons get a pool, and Lisa gains popularity among the kids of Springfield, causing her brain to leave her and Lisa to speak in a Simpleton Voice. Her brains come back when everyone leaves for Martin's pool on the other side of town.
I Just Want to Be Special: She's a child academic with a bright future ahead of her and she feels like she's a victim of circumstance due to her family's poor income and lack of shared interests. She aspires to be around people who share her interests and she wants to be in a school where she feels challenged. She can be selfish about it, but she (at times) wouldn't sacrifice someone else's wellbeing for her own benefit. For instance, she immediately quit an upper-class school after she found out that she only got into it because Marge offered to do their laundry in exchange for her enrollment.
I Just Want to Have Friends: While in some episodes, she does have friends, she is sometimes portrayed as a lonely outcast Depending on the Writer and this trope provides the plot of several episodes.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: Lisa Simpson’s Fatal Flaw is that she defines herself by being smarter then others and due to flanderization this aspect of her has only gotten worse throughout the years. Lisa has done things such as willingly staying a Normal Fish in a Tiny Pond, to completely alienating her fellow student (by being a Soapbox Sadie to those who don’t share her interest and an Insufferable Genius to those that do). At her worse, Lisa will flat out sabotage others out of jealousy. While she will usually feel sorry for her actions it’s only after she gets what she wants.
Informed Deformity: On several occasions it has been stated that Lisa has a large backside, despite her body shape resembling most other Springfield kids.
Informed Loner: She's supposed to be a lonely outsider. However, she occasionally hangs out with average girls of her class and has no problem getting along with her schoolmates, unless the plot wants her to be unpopular. And for all her unpopularity, many boys have shown interest in her, and she also gains popularity easily over the course of many storylines, often becoming praised and loved by many people.
Innocent Prodigy: Usually rather level headed and one of the most intelligent people in Springfield. However her brattiness and childlike naive perks up many times, especially where her Sibling Rivalry with Bart is involved.
Insufferable Genius: At her worst. She longs to be challenged, but it's clear she enjoys feeling smarter than her peers.
Intelligence Equals Isolation: Played straight sometimes. In earlier seasons Lisa had a best friend called Janey and had quite a lot of friends, but they got pushed aside and forgotten. The latest episodes show some of those friends, Janey included, but they tend to push Lisa away whenever she shows her smarts.
Introverted Cat Person: Aside from early seasons, Lisa is usually presented as a friendless loner. She has a fondness for cats and has owned several.
It's All About Me:
Just like Bart, Lisa shows many signs of this trope. She defines herself by being better then others, to the point where many of her worst moments are more about proving that she's right than proving her point.
One example of this comes from the episode "Gone Abie Gone", Lisa gains $413,762 through gambling but loses the money. When Bart tells her that he was the user who won Lisa's money, Lisa immediately claimed ownership and thought that she would use the money to go to college and then use the rest of the money to live like a queen.
Jerkass Ball: She's prone to this, usually when she tries to force her own personal beliefs on everyone else.
Jerkass Has a Point: A common thing. While she isn't always pleasant, Lisa's points do make sense quite often, especially since a lot of people around her tend to act like utter morons.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Post-flanderization, she tends to fall under this trope. She's generally kindhearted and well-behaved, but has a nasty tendency to push her beliefs into other people's throats, change her point of view at the drop of a hat in order to look cool, and break down when she realizes someone in her family is better than her in a given activity. At the very least, however, she'll often own up to her faults in the end.
Karma Houdini: In her earlier days, she was essentially a female Bart, but shrewder in her mischief, so had a much greater tendency to go unpunished than her brother. Allegedly, the creative team were stated to be dead against the suggestion of Homer violently disciplining Lisa in the same way he does Bart.
Kindhearted Cat Lover: She's usually portrayed as the "nice one" of the Simpson kids and she's a big cat fan. She is the primary caretaker of Snowball II.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All:
The Trope Namer. Though Lisa is very smart and knows stuff people don't already know, Homer and Lisa's argument at the dinner table in "Lisa the Vegetarian" has Homer calling his daughter a "barbecue-wrecking, know-nothing, know-it-all". She does have a moment of this in "Money BART". When Lisa becomes the manager of Bart's baseball team, she claims that there have been several women managers and lists some off like Terry Francona and Connie Mack. Nelson tells her that all of her examples are men, much to Lisa's shock. At times, Lisa skirts this trope in the sense of having the knowledge and not knowing how it applies in a more practical sense.
Several episodes also highlight that for all her intelligence, she's actually not as smart as she might think. For example, in Bart Vs. Lisa Vs. The Third Grade, she aces a test and is bumped up to third grade. However, once she enters third grade, the environment is a little different and what they are taught is slightly more complex compared to second grade. One would think Lisa would have no issue with a minor change like this, but she completely crumbles and welcomes going back to being "a big fish in a small pond" simply to make herself feel like the smartest one in the room again.
Lady And A Scholar: She's a very intelligent child who is more well-spoken and philosophical than the other kids. Despite a few Insufferable Genius moments and her Sibling Rivalry with Bart, she is mostly polite, pleasant, and friendly to everyone.
Lady Macbeth:
In "The Spy Who Learned Me", she helped Nelson gain a great physical condition, but didn't stop him from hurting innocent kids, only commenting that "He's hard on the nerds but easy on the eyes".
In "Dial 'N' for Nerder" she pressures Bart to prevent him from confessing about the murder and tried to offer herself as Nelson's girlfriend to prevent him from revealing her confession.
The Lancer: To Bart, whenever they take on Sideshow Bob.
Like Parent, Like Child: Lisa gets her morals from Marge. In some of the earlier episodes, she also has a tendency to say "Hmmmmmm..." like her. In "Marge the Meanie", she says she gets her kind heart from Homer, despite them worrying on several occasions they have nothing in common. Many other episodes show that several of Lisa's talents actually come from Homer, who is Brilliant, but Lazy.
Like Parent, Unlike Child: Despite her being his favorite child, Lisa and Homer share very little in common. One episode has him worry about this, not helped by his bar buddies suggesting she might not even be his, but she reassures that she got his kindness and protectiveness of his family.
Limited Wardrobe: Always wears an orange dress with pearls. In one episode she decides to trade her pearls to get a rare Olympic Games pin to complete a collection, which was a big deal as she considered it part of her identity.
Little Miss Badass: Sometimes, when she isn't being the butt of a joke or damsel in distress. She's a natural Guile Heroine despite her young age . And physically, Lisa one-hit KO'd Bart in an MMA ring and she also connects a gloriously-animated punch on Bart in the movie.
Little Miss Snarker: Her snark is her defence mechanism amidst her dysfunctional family. She's the smart one and educated one among the uncultured and the others are boorish or stupid. Her mother alternates between being like the others or a sophisticated, artistic woman.
Magic Skirt: Lisa's trademark red sundress; especially egregious as it's a dress with no waist, which should logically fall all the way down to her shoulders whenever she's upside down.
Mature Younger Sibling: Lisa is much smarter and wiser than her ten-year-old brother Bart, often warning him against bad ideas and such forth. In fact, in "My Sister, My Sitter", when the parents are out, she babysits him rather than the other way around.
AM/FM Characterization: She's generally depicted as being a fan of Jazz and Blues (her saxophone playing is also one of the most memorable things about her character), with an exception in the episode "Panic on the Streets of Springfield" where she got really into an expy of Morrissey.
Middle Child Syndrome: She often has trouble fitting in with her family, and they often have trouble understanding her. Several episodes explore this dynamic in detail.
Morality Chain: Like Marge, Lisa often plays the conscience for the family and often becomes a morality pet for people outside of the family.
Morality Pet: Among the three kids, she is the one Homer is shown making the most effort to be a good father to. In addition, if anyone, even his wife, somehow hurts her in some way, he gets intensely angry. It is implied that Lisa was neglected by Homer as a baby, when Homer observes some old videos of him completely ignoring her early talents, he is driven to tears in guilt.
Mouthy Kid: Her intelligent comments earn her the ire of the rest of Springfield's citizens.
Ms. Exposition:
Lisa: Dad! The flash [of the camera] must have scrambled [the robots'] circuits!
Homer: What are you, the narrator?
Lisa: Aah, just keep taking pictures.
Ms. Imagination: Lisa occasionally drifts off into a fantasy world to avoid the grim reality of living life in Springfield.
Ms. Vice Girl: Lisa is intellectually gifted, philosophical and compassionate, and all at the age of eight years old. Perhaps because of the awareness of her gifts however, she can sometimes be incredibly egomaniacal and self righteous, with an over insistence on being the center of attention and pushing her beliefs down others' throats, and often insensitively dismissing others as stupider or less significant than her.
Nerds Love Tough Schoolwork: From time to time. In one episode the school has to shut down, and by the time Lisa gets home she is hysterical due to withdrawal. She immediately takes out an emergency kit she keeps under the couch, which contains a picture of Springfield Elementary and a tape recording of a teacher yelling at students.
Nerdy Bully: Zig-zagged. Due to All of the Other Reindeer Lisa repeatedly flip flops from Bully Magnet to Academic Alpha Bitch Depending on the Writer.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Ironically, despite being the voice of reason, every time Homer gets into a position of power, once he takes advice from Lisa, it usually ends up meaning that things go horribly wrong and everyone jumps ship. Then again, the people working underneath Homer tend to be idiots who don't want things to change, the prime example being the Stonecutters.
No Accounting for Taste: It says a lot that her best future choice is Nelson. She’s married to Hubert at some point who is a jerk, and Milhouse who is a pathetic Stalker with a Crush, and she was happy in neither. She also nearly gets married to Hugh who wants her to never see her family again, and a Hair-Trigger Temper game board guy who she promises is actually really sweet.
Normal Fish in a Tiny Pond: Every time Lisa finds herself in a classroom setting other than Miss Hoover's second grade class and is actually challenged by the teachers and coursework, she doesn't get the A's she's used to.
Not So Above It All:
Though often priding herself on her intelligence and maturity, she is still a kid and enjoys some of the same things as Bart (such as Itchy & Scratchy or prank-calling Moe). Even with Bart's pranks, if she's not the first to scold them, she's likely the first to laugh at them. And as noted above, she is not above bending the rules completely.
Later episodes show Lisa daydreaming about murdering Bart, and she was all too willing to cover up the assumed, if accidental, murder of Martin Prince to stay out of trouble. It looks as if she's not entirely immune to Springfield's corruption.
At the end of "Lisa The Simpson", Lisa loudly cheers with a "woo hoo!" that would have done Homer proud when she finally solves the kiddie puzzle that made her question if she was losing her intellect. She immediately corrects herself to say "splendid", but she's still enough of a Simpson to borrow several of her father's catchphrases. She uses "D'oh!" more often than you'd think she would.
Onee-sama: She's Maggie's older sister and is a revered 8th grader for her high intellect.
Only Sane Woman: She often finds herself thrust into the role of only sane girl. Quite often, when her family (or occasionally, the entire town) is caught up in some insane course of action, she's the one who points out how absurd things have become. Her comments are usually ignored. The straight man role is usually traded between Lisa and Marge. Sometimes Lisa is also caught up in the craziness, for example with the Movementarians.
Ping Pong Naïveté: She switches between world-weary cynicism and childlike naiveté as the plot demands. In one instance, within seconds - she hurls a bucket of red paint at Krusty (who's wearing a coat made from some kind of animal skins), screams "Fur is murder!" then follows it with "When's the Krusty movie coming out?"
Poor Communication Kills: Lisa often has trouble conveying her ambitions in a positive manner. In "Lisa Simpson, This Isn't Your Life", she decides to devote herself to her education after discovering Marge's childhood achievements before meeting Homer. She wanted to have a good future and improve her education, however, an offended Marge took this as "my mother is a failure because she chose to be a housewife".
Proud to Be a Geek: Zigzagged. There are times where she doesn't feel that way and wants to be like everyone else, and others where she takes pride in her geekier aspects.
Ridiculously Successful Future Self: It depends on the episode. At best, she either becomes a successful businesswoman or the President of the United States when she grows up. Her personal life however is mixed, with a strained relationship with her husband and daughter. "Mother and Child Reunion" has Marge asking if Homer and Bart will get along in the future, and they eventually will, but Marge and Lisa will also struggle.
Screw the Money, I Have Rules!: Aside from minor issues, Lisa rarely compromises with her principles and never takes a bribe.
Secret-Keeper: "A Milhouse Divided" implies Lisa is Homer's confidant for stuff he doesn't want Marge to know (or at least that he thinks Marge doesn't know about).
Homer: There's a lot of stuff she doesn't know about!
Lisa: You mean like your poker shack in the swamp?
Homer: Yuh-huh.
Lisa: She knows.
Shed the Family Name: In one episode, Lisa is hustled out of winning a crossword puzzle competition. What's worse, Homer made a massive winning by betting against his own daughter. Seeing the evidence of this betrayal destroys Lisa's faith in her father to thr point that she abandons the Simpson name for her mother's maiden name. By the end of the episode, Lisa and Homer reconcile and she returns to being Lisa Simpson.
Signature Instrument: Her saxophone, of course. She's always seen playing it when she's feeling the blues or preparing for a gig. Interestingly, some of the background music involving her scenes will occasionally play a sax, even when her sax is not present.
Small Name, Big Ego: Lisa is the school's outcast and takes pride in this and maintaining her intelligence which causes her to become envious and jealous towards anyone who outsmarts her. She also tends to look down on the other residents of Springfield, despite regularly being just as much as of a jackass as them in later seasons.
Small Town Boredom: She's discontented with the quality of culture and general intelligence in Springfield and longs for more sophisticated surroundings.
The Smart Girl: The smartest one in the family, and easily one of the smartest people in Springfield.
Snap Back: Averted in "Lisa the Vegetarian." Originally, the writers wanted it to be a one-time, What If? thing and go back to normal the next episode. However, Paul McCartney (the episode's guest star), when originally asked to appear, would only appear if he was assured that the change would be permanent. Also averted in "Sleeping With the Enemy" when Lisa tells Homer that she still feels insecure about her body and she's not going to go back to acting like she's not. However, later episodes never again mention Lisa and her eating disorder.
Soapbox Sadie: Became one of the most infamous examples after Flanderization.
In the "Bart Star" episode, her soapbox was deflated, as she tried to join the pee-wee football team. "That's right, a girl wants to join the team." After it was revealed that there were four girls already on the team, she tries to raise a fuss about the fact that footballs are made from pigskin. She then learns that the balls are synthetic and with each purchase, money is donated to Amnesty International. Unable to cope with not being on the moral high ground, she runs off crying.
Lisa also has a habit of jumping on a soapbox for boys - though she already has views on the subject she will amp them up to get boys to notice her.
Speaks Fluent Animal: In "Mr. Lisa's Opus", when she's telling her dormmate her skills, she mentions that she speaks fluent cat, then makes subtitled cat noises.
The Stool Pigeon:
She's pretty much this constantly, with many many plots throughout the seasons (as an example, "Lisa Gets an "A"") revolving about someone building a lie (and sometimes the plot showing that the lie is the better thing for everybody (even Lisa herself) and everybody saying so) and Lisa trying to tell the truth regardless. She thinks of herself as a Concerned Claire-type (in that she says it's the legal/moral thing to do), but what type she really is depends on the plot at hand (at least sometimes shows to be doing it out of some desire to thumb her nose up at the liar).
"Bart the Daredevil": Despite trying to convince Bart the dangers of daredevil stunts, Lance Murdock is instead impressed by Bart's interest in it, which causes Lisa to tell Homer about it, fearing that he may get hurt or die despite getting the most attention.
"Mypods and Boomsticks": She squeals on Bart after pulling a prank on Steve Mobbs and the rest of the consumers and employees.
Straight Man: Lisa has the thankless task of playing foil to her entire town. In the early days she and Bart were a classic Straight Man and Wise Guy combo, and while this is still true, she often finds herself playing straight to almost everyone else in Springfield. Luckily, she is usually excellent at it. Occasionally, especially in later seasons, Lisa's more extreme personality traits will come to the fore and she gets to have someone else play off her for a change.
Straw Feminist: Depends on the episode:
While Lisa is normally passive in her beliefs as she speaks of the achievements of women and voices her support for leading feminists. There are a few times when she's gotten unfairly irritated toward men (Homer in particular) and in one episode, she expresses disappointment toward her mother for choosing to forgo her education after meeting Homer.
Lisa: Dad, put aside your selfish male ego and tell the truth!
Especially played straight in "Bart Star" where her feminism is Played for Laughs and only serves to make her look foolish in one scene. She smugly declares she wants to join the football team as a You Go, Girl! ("That's right. A girl wants to play football. How about that?") but after it's revealed that are already four girls on the team, she loses interest and claims that football is not her thing anyway.
Strong as They Need to Be: Very much the same as her family members. She can go from being pathetically weak, to holding her own against Bart in a fight, to easily clobbering him and others when angry.
Surrounded by Idiots: She actually once voiced that she lives in a town of idiots in an issue of the comic.
Teacher's Pet: Her ego is often a result of her parents and school teachers putting her on a pedestal because of her intelligence and morals.
Telepathy: She reads a worm's mind in "Lisa the Vegetarian". However, it is likely Psychological Projection, as the worm thinks exactly what she would imagine the worm to think, in exactly the bleating voice the lamb she ate for dinner used when pleading not to be eaten in the previous evening's Imagine Spot.
To Be Lawful or Good: A frequent problem for her. A sweet moment in “Marge The Meanie” has her admit that she got morals from Marge and a good heart from Homer.
Token Good Teammate: Excluding Maggie, Lisa and Marge are often more likely be this trope than Bart and Homer among the family. Case in point, She was the only Simpson who wanted to give Bobo to Burns without getting any money.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: In most Future Episodes, Maggie is usually a tough, laid-back tomboy and Lisa is usually a prim and proper girly girl.
Too Clever by Half: In the first "Treehouse of Horror", Kang and Kodos abduct them in their flying saucer to live in luxury. Lisa snoops around the ship and finds a book titled "How to Cook Humans". Offended at the notion, the aliens blow some dust off the book's cover revealing the title to be "How to Cook For Humans". To which Lisa points out that there is still dust on the book, with the title now "How to Cook Forty Humans". Kang then demonstrate that there is yet still more dust on the book's cover, finally revealing the book's full title "How to Cook For Forty Humans" (the Simpsons were gluttons).
Marge: Now you know what we mean when we say you're too smart for your own good?
Took a Level in Jerkass: An unfortunate aspect of Lisa's Character Development over the seasons was her growing not only more "saintly", but also becoming full of herself, rude towards those she considered less than her, and pushy about her beliefs. In certain cases, she can be downright immoral at worst, such as in "Fan-ily Feud".
Trademark Favorite Food: Despite being a vegetarian, she really loves shrimp.
TV Genius: Zigzagged. Lisa does at very least have Insufferable Genius qualities and on occasion is rather blindly obnoxious and self serving in her ethics, to the point of being a Soapbox Sadie. In Lisa's defense, Flanderization is a strong factor for this, and she's still usually one of the most well-adjusted characters on the show.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: With Milhouse in some possible future. He grows up to be balding with a gut and Lisa grows up beautifully in episodes like "Holidays of Future Passed."
The Ugly Guy's Hot Daughter: She'll grow up to look much better in her 40s then Homer did, as seen in episodes taking place in the future.
Unbuilt Trope: By way of Characterization Marches On, her earlier depictions as a Child Prodigy show that, for as much of a prodigy as she may be, she's still a child with a limited understanding of the world. "Lisa's Pony" is a good example of this, where she indulges in her newfound hobby before realizing that Homer is working himself to exhaustion to support it. Also her activism is driven by a tortured conscience.
Ungrateful Bitch: At her worst. Most notably towards Homer, especially given the number of times she tried to shut down the plant, which would leave Homer jobless and the entire family to starve.
Unknown Rival:
Lisa fears and hates Sideshow Bob as much as Bart and has outgambitted him just as often. Despite this, Bob's psychotic vendetta sticks with just Bart (and sometimes Krusty and rakes on the side), even lampshading that he is utterly apathetic towards Lisa.
Turned around in one of the comics, where Cecil dedicates himself to ruining Lisa even though they'd had no prior interaction, simply because they were the less favored sibling.
Virgin in a White Dress: In a Flash Forward episode where we see Lisa's wedding, she and Marge briefly discuss this as they are a church-going family.
Lisa: Mom, I feel kind of funny wearing white. I mean... Milhouse.
Marge: [dismissive] Oh, Milhouse doesn't count.
Virtuous Vegetarianism: Lisa is both the most intelligent and idealistic member of the cast and has converted to vegetarianism. Originally her conversion was to teach An Aesop about accepting the differences of others, but since learning her lesson it's remained a part of her character note .
Wacky Parent, Serious Child: Being the Only Sane Woman and Child Prodigy genius she is, Lisa plays the Serious Child role to her Wacky Parent of a Bumbling Dad Homer.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: Lisa will often resort to extreme methods for ideals and her methods are examined in some episodes.
In "Lisa the Vegetarian", she ruins Homer's barbeque because she was the only one who didn't like the idea of eating a roast pig. While Lisa believes herself to be in the right, her fellow vegetarians actually call her out on this. Rather than convince people to join her vegetarianism, she inspired the anti-vegetarian backlash since they didn't understand why she was so offended about a roast pig and she didn't explain why eating meat is wrong.
In "The Simpsons Game", she and Bart destroy a logging camp because she believed they should save the trees. However, once the pair do destroy the camp, they are confronted by a pair of loggers who are now out of work since they now lack the means to provide for their families and don't have the skills to find other means of work.
White Sheep: Sometimes she's portrayed like this and is seen as Token Good Teammate of the family. In "Lisa's Wedding" her (future) boyfriend Hugh tells her "You're like a flower that grew out of a pot of dirt". She doesn't take it well.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Lisa was this in earlier seasons. She followed her ideals the best she could but the rest of Springfield either didn't understand her ideals or didn't want to conform to them. Her vegetarianism is the best example of this, she became a vegetarian because she became horrified and guilt-ridden for eating meat after playing with a lamb. She tried to convert her family, school and friends but they couldn't understand. She became aggressive with her views but eventually calmed down after Apu, Paul and Linda McCartney taught her that aggression won't get people to understand her views but patiently influencing them will slowly get them to understand her viewpoint.
Wise Beyond Her Years: In fact, one episode had Mayor Quimby surprised that she's a child, saying that he always thought she was a midget—Lisa explains that she isn't and that the preferred term is "little person." When she was two, she was as articulate as any person, with only a few grammar errors. Believe it or not, this is actually Truth in Television- some two-year-olds can have conversations with you.
Women Are Wiser: Compared to Bart, although they play this trope to a much lesser extent than their parents. Lisa is certainly much more intelligent and mature than Bart, but Bart is the more socially adept of the two and can rival or surpass her intellectually when he applies himself. She's also normally smarter than Homer and Abe, excluding her moments of grabbing the Idiot Ball.
Worthy Opponent: After thwarting scheme after scheme with her ingenuity and sharp wit, Lisa has earned Sideshow Bob's respect as a worthy adversary.
You're Not My Mother: "You're Not My Mother and Father". She did this to both of her parents when they really upset her (to Homer in "Homer and Lisa Exchange Cross Words", and to Marge in "How Lisa Got Her Marge Back").