Abusive Parents: Not so much in the early seasons, but Flanderization has turned Marge into this. Aside from how often she turns a blind eye to the struggles Bart and Lisa face, Marge can be emotionally abusive and neglectful to even Maggie. On rare occasions, she will actually be physically abusive, with a one-off joke in "The President Wore Pearls" revealing that she threw vodka in Maggie's face at one point. That said, like with Homer, it greatly varies Depending on the Writer.
Action Mom: She despises violence but, somewhat ironically, is regularly shown to be very physically gifted and a skilled fighter. She was once a police officer, a bodybuilder, and won an MMA match. And God help you if you mess with her kids.
Aesop Amnesia: No matter how often she meddles in someone else's affairs and inevitably makes things worse because she's against it for whatever reason the episode gives her and learns she shouldn't do it, she keeps doing it anyway in later episodes.
Aggressive Submissive: The inversion to Homer's playing it straight. Even at her most Extreme Doormat Antics-Enabling Wife, she was always the one pouncing on Homer for sex, or calling the shots in the bedroom.
Always Save the Girl: Gender-flipped, as it's lampshaded that Homer being who he is juggles the Distress Ball a lot, and Marge is a Violently Protective Wife.
Homer: Once again, I have to thank you for saving me when I failed at saving you.
Amazingly Embarrassing Parents: While not as much as Homer, she tends to embarrass her kids, especially Bart.
Amusing Injuries: Her hair often gets destroyed in various creative ways.
Antics-Enabling Wife: Marge is a classic example of this trope, often doing next to nothing to stop Homer's antics aside from glares and mild nagging while suffering in silence through the consequences. Deconstructed occasionally, as it's revealed she really does like him as a zany Manic Pixie Dream Guy, they'll even swap roes when she really wants something, and Springfield (while having a lot of gall) ends up calling her the worst one of the family because she enables their mess.
The Artifact: Apparently, the original reason for the giant beehive was that it hid rabbit ears. Eventually, the idea was scrapped.
Beauty Equals Goodness: She's considered one of the most attractive women in Springfield, and is usually kind and well-intentioned. Compare her to her husband (a bald and overweight man who's a Jerkass with a Heart of Gold) and both of Marge's sisters (who are unattractive, other than being rude and unpleasant people).
Beehive Hairdo: Yes. Some flashbacks depict her as having had it since she was a baby, though the first full-episode flashback shows her only doing it like this for her high school prom.
Belief Makes You Stupid: Despite her standing as the voice of reason and common sense to her husband's stupidity and impulsiveness, Marge has a tendency to let her religious views cloud her judgement, leading her to act as a narrow-minded fundamentalist at best or a self-righteous Moral Guardian at worst.
Beware the Nice Ones: Despite her conservative personality and general niceness, she's scary when angered. You do not want to piss her off. Numerous focus episodes tend to show how vicious she can be. She shamed the entire population of Springfield because they drove Bart to suicide over a little league game. When driven past breaking point by Homer being an extra-strength jerkass, Marge finally loses her temper completely and attacks Ned with a broken bottle (Ned is stronger than he looks and admits he's having difficulty keeping Marge at bay, she did manage to stab him).
Big "WHAT?!": Has a tendency to let these out whenever Homer says or does something insane. In other words, at least once every other episode.
The Bore: Marge's incredibly bland taste in everything is a frequent source of humor. For example; looking for some adrenaline in her life, Marge decides to stop buying regular ham, and go instead for deviled ham. Contrast this with Homer's Renaissance Man qualities, music, language, etc. only some of which are played as one off jokes.
Broken Bird: Marge shares the same issue as Lisa that Status Quo Is God gets to her, and any kind of hopeful activity beyond being a housewife will disappear. Multiple episodes later on have her upset that she's wasted her potential, has intense anxiety and maybe depression due to being taken for granted, and needs Lisa to be successful (but not too much) so she can vicariously live out her dreams. Luckily she loves her family more than anything, her Manic Pixie Dream Guy will never stop trying to make things right, and her special kids call her their favorite person.
But Not Too Foreign: Her and the entire Bouvier family's names and her thick curly hair indicate she might be of Creole ancestry.
Catchphrase: "Hmmmmmm..." According to one of the DVD audio commentaries, the writers wanted to establish "I don't think that's a good idea" as her catchphrase in earlier seasons.
Character Development: Depending on the Writer, she took pains to become more assertive after the movie made her confront what a Love Martyr she'd been to her increasingly Jerkass husband.
Clingy Jealous Girl: Any woman getting too close to Homer (even if they are genuinely just friends) will drive her insane. One of the main reasons she stays married to Homer is because she feels the need to possess him and have him dependent on her. After forgiving Lurleen, she threatens her with serious bodily harm if she comes near her husband again. Luckily for her, Homer is oblivious to all attraction other women have as Marge is the only woman he loves.
Cloudcuckoolander: Definitely downplayed compared to Homer, but she still has moments that show her to be on the loopy side.
Marge: Why don't you bring this potato? It's pretty big.
Bart: Mom, you're always trying to give us potatoes. What is it with you?
Marge: I just think they're neat.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: That said, she's typically the one who prevents Homer from doing anything too foolish.
The Comically Serious: Noted for her rather dull and no-risk demeanor, occasionally getting dizzy thrills out of monotonous activities like household chores (she does desire excitement and diversity every once in a while however, which is revealed to be a partial reason she likes Homer).
Covering Up Your Gray: "Secrets of a Successful Marriage" reveals that Marge has been "gray as a mule" since she was 17 and that she has been dying it to cover it up. This is expanded on in "The Blue and the Gray", where it's revealed that every time she has her hair dyed, she forgets that she has gray hair, thus making her horrified when she gets what she thinks is her first gray hair. She initially goes for a complete gray look, then goes back to dying it to help combat her jealousy issues.
Covert Pervert: In some episodes, she does some perverse things including getting drunk. Also this line from when Homer was reading Kama Sutra.
Homer: Hey, look, Marge, they took our idea.
Marge: Ooooh.
Daddy's Girl: This isn't very apparent, as said dad has very few appearances and isn't mentioned very often, but "Fear of Flying" seems to imply that Marge was close to her father. So finding out his Unmanly Secret was shocking to her.
Determinator: Whenever Marge really wants something, she will stop at nothing to get it.
Domestic Abuse: Over the years, per Flanderization, Marge has become a serious offender of this. Whereas Homer has never intentionally harmed Marge or cheated on her, Marge is shown doing this in episodes such as "Strong Arms Of The Ma" and "Brake My Wife Please", actually running over Homer with a car in the latter.
The Dragon: Occasionally shown as such in her and Bart's relationship for comical reasons, such as season 9's "Brother From Another Series" ("Get 'im Lis!").
Dude Magnet: Many men were attracted to her, like Moe, Mr. Burns, or her high school classmate who was still obsessed with her after 20 years.
Education Mama: Especially with Bart, she even home-schools him for a period of time. It's Justified due to Bart being such a lazy and poor student and Marge being right to worry about his future. Notably, Bart shows more improvement when she homeschools him than he ever did at Springfield Elementary.
Expressive Hair: Marge's hair being disheveled is usually a sign of her being upset or stressed. The Running Gag of characters getting advice and arguing with their brain goes up to eleven with Marge when her hair is the entity giving her advice.
Extreme Doormat: Not originally, with Marge being surprisingly assertive in the early seasons, but she gradually became this in regards to dealing with her family's increasingly idiotic antics.
As Homer became more of a Jerkass, Marge appeared to be more and more of a doormat, forgiving him over and over again, not only for stupid accidents and acts of ignorance, but huge acts of genuine deceit. While Bart and Lisa weren't willing to put up with it in many cases, Marge overlooked almost everything he did. Finally addressed in the movie where Marge declares she has put up with Homer's jerkass nature and shenanigans long enough and decides to leave him. Homer spends the rest of the movie figuring out why Marge left him and what he can do to correct it, and they both got better after that. Some episodes show that this behavior came from how Patty and Selma treated her.
This also extends to her other family members. Not only does she often overlook how poorly her sisters treat others (especially Homer), but she will often turn a blind eye to Bart and Lisa's antics, despite the increasing problems they cause. This is even noted at one point when the rest of Springfield kick out the Simpsons.
This isn't limited to just the family. In "Kill Gil: Volumes I & II", after feeling guilty about indirectly getting Mall Santa Gil fired, she allows him to move into the home, where he quickly and repeatedly takes advantage of their hospitality. Whereas Marge could have put her foot down at any point, her soft boundaries and his manipulation stops her. Once he finally leaves the home with a new job across the country, she buys him a summer home after getting him fired again.
Fan Hater: In-universe example. When at her worst, Marge is willing to protest anything she despises because others like it, even outright admitting this in "The Great Wife Hope".
Fanservice Pack: She was originally designed to look kind of dowdy, befitting an overworked housewife (hence the exaggerated Beehive Hairdo). But as Homer is expressly overweight and slovenly she came across quite a bit more attractive in comparison. A couple of episodes take advantage of this.
The main plot of the episode "Large Marge" is all about her accidentally gaining huge boobs (they were meant for Mayor Quimby's female intern). She in fact went into plastic surgery for light liposuction after developing some body image insecurities.
In some Halloween specials she is more busty than in regular episodes, especially when based on fanservice-heavy genres like Slasher films.
After getting mugged Marge started weight training and exercising regularly, developing a much more fit, athletic body compared to her normal softer figure. Then when she gets into competitive bodybuilding it becomes Fan Disservice, as her heavily muscled shoulders and arms looks unsettling in her traditional green dress.
Feminine Women Can Cook:
Marge seems to buy into this quite a lot, as she does take a lot of joy in preparing household meals. But a long-running background joke is that Marge can be a pretty bland cook, once claiming that her secret ingredient was salt.
Though averted in one episode, where she apparently made bad sundaes.
Marge: What's wrong with my sundaes?!
Fictional Fan, Real Celebrity: Marge was a fan of Ringo Starr in particular when younger, making various paintings of him and even sending him one. When she was a kid, she was a big fan of Davy Jones, of The Monkees.
Flanderization:
She went from being a loving, prepared, down-to-earth mother who lectured Bart whenever he was up to his old tricks to overprotecting him and being paranoid about his well-being.
Like Homer, Marge was often shown to be Not So Above It All, even getting drunk in the first season and embarrassing Homer at a party thrown by Burns. Yet, she also had a clear set of ethics, and regularly called out Homer and the kids when they were about to cross a line. Nowadays, she regularly ignores how increasingly dysfunctional her family has become, to the point of ignoring their well-being.
Her somewhat no-nonsense personality was also Flanderized somewhat. In early episodes, she was merely wiser and something of a nag, though she did cut loose on several occasions. In later episodes she is extremely boring and un-impulsive by nature, getting hyped up by household chores and monotonous hobbies.
Her boringness. The first time Marge learned her husband and children thought she was no fun, in season 5, Marge was actually hurt and angered by this. In later years, Marge actively seeks the best ways to be duller than dishwater, and make other types of fun illegal.
Despite her flaws, Marge was clearly a nice woman at heart, and dearly loved her family as much as the next housewife. Nowadays, she can be quite a jackass, to the extent of actually trying to kill Homer a couple times, and being okay with the potentially life-threatening woes their children face, if not outright instigating them.
Foil: To Homer. While Homer is goofy, aggressive, and unintelligent, Marge is serious, calm, and rather smart. Typically she's the one who prevents Homer from doing anything too foolish.
Former Teen Rebel: "Marge the Meanie" reveals that Marge was The Prankster at her middle school and that she, not Homer, is probably the source of Bart's love for mischief.
Freudian Excuse: As much as Marge refuses to admit it, her childhood was pretty terrible. Her mother was dismissive and taught her to be a conservative Stepford Smiler who feels like she can't do anything right, her dad was protective but kept secrets from her, and Patty and Selma's bullying made her an Extreme Doormat with a mean side that she feels awful about. She's also been sexually assaulted by Artie Ziff, who makes no secret that he wants to do it again, and projects her trauma over dreams sacrificed onto Lisa.
Friendless Background: A fact made clear several times is that Marge has little to no actual friends, for a variety of reasons. One big reason is Homer and the kids, who accidentally drives away those who might want to socialize with her. A secondary reason is due to being a card-carrying wet blanket, as shown at the beginning of "The Twisted World of Marge Simpson".
The Friend Nobody Likes: In the times where she is shown to have friends they're either shown to be extremely judgmental of her for either her parenting style or marriage, or find her to be extremely dull and boring.
The Fundamentalist: It's not overt, but Marge is incredibly intolerant when Lisa decides to convert to Buddhism, first saying she couldn't get dessert and later trying to bribe her with a (fake) pony on Christmas, and when Bart decides to become Catholic, she even kidnaps him from the Catholic School. Marge hates Catholics and thinks they are strange... despite being proud of and "knowledgeable" of her French heritage. France is a historically Catholic nation with the Christian population of France being overwhelmingly Catholic with over 13 million members, in comparison the Protestant population is only around 500,000. Likewise, she's outraged when Homer desires to forgo church in lieu of passively worshipping God from his couch, going as far as calling him wicked, or when he joins Bart in becoming Catholic. She eventually accepts her family's choices, as long as they perform lip-service at Church on Sunday. This is a really weird trait for her to have, as one episode showed that she hadn't even bothered to have her children baptised. Marge's moralizing is so infamous that the entire town knows about it. When the townspeople are debating whether to adopt legalized gambling, Mayor Quimby asks if there are any moral objections. Everybody in the room immediately turns towards Marge, who actually supports it.
The Gambling Addict: In the episode where a casino is built in Springfield, Marge becomes addicted to the slots and neglects her family to keep playing. Since then, her gambling is mostly under control, though it is mentioned every now and then.
Good Cannot Comprehend Evil: Marge tends to be oblivious to bad people such as bullies. However, as seen in "Sleeping with the Enemy", she does seem to be aware of Nelson's bullying as she asks him if he was the boy who beats up her son, suggesting that she is either naive towards bullying or is easily manipulated by the bullies.
Good Parents: Depending on the Writer. She is a very loving and caring mother who has a close bond with all her children. She has her issues and sometimes argues with Bart or Lisa, but her intentions are good, and she is always willing to support her children and give them advice.
Gossipy Hens: She does love her gossip. When Maggie's baby monitor picks up on phone calls, she becomes addicted to listening to it.
Green-Eyed Monster: In "Friends and Family", the prospect of Homer getting a new female best friend named Julia causes her to become irate with him and complain that if another woman is his best friend then that makes their marriage feel less important if Marge herself isn't his best friend. She of course comes around to her senses (but feels right being angry at him anyway).
Hairstyle Inertia: Zig Zagged. Depictions of her earlier years vary between her having the same Beehive Hairdo (sometimes shorter than it usually is) or a different style. Typically as a child she has a beehive while during her teen years she’s always shown with having her hair straight and worn down.
Hammerspace Hair: Her total height including the hair is eight foot six. Her hairdo is strong enough to hold everything from Maggie to a beach umbrella to a jar full of money to a ten-pin bowling ball.
Happily Married: For most of the show's run with Homer. Despite the many conflicts they get into, they'll always find their way out of it.
Hard-Drinking Party Girl: Occasionally, though she's normally more of a social drinker.
Heroic Willpower: It's a common thing to have her resist mind control even when everyone around her has succumbed, as we've seen in "The Joy of Sect" and the first Treehouse of Horror.
Hidden Depths:
She is great at making sculptures and wanted to be a painter once.
She can be a great teacher to her son, Bart. On multiple occasions, she has shown how to get Bart to learn something in a way he would like and she actually does a better job then the local school system.
Hidden Eyes: In the aforementioned "Little Orphan Millie", to keep Homer guessing her eye color.
Hikikomori: Spends a period like this in "The Strong Arms of the Ma". She eventually overcame this after using the weight-lifting set Homer bought from Rainier Wolfcastle.
Honor Thy Abuser: To dangerous extents, especially after the first couple seasons. In “Barting Over”, she’s more annoyed at Bart finally strangling Homer than the usual opposite, and while Homer clearly hasn’t told her much about his childhood, the stuff she does know doesn’t stop her from thinking he should make nice with Grampa. Even she doesn’t like her sisters or mother much, but still thinks she (plus the rest of the family) should be dutiful. Gets confronted with this attitude in “King Leer”, as Moe’s terrible family makes her realize that not every family should force it to work.
Hope Bringer: To her whole family. She’s the only thing stopping Bart from going off the rails, Lisa is miserable without her mother supporting her, Maggie would have chosen the Flanders if not for her, and seeing her in detention got Homer out of his Missing Mom Despair Event Horizon.
Horrible Judge of Character: Zigzagged. Marge is sometimes naive towards people or tend to let her fundamentals influence her better judgement, but she's often depicted as the Only Sane Man of the family. When Bart is told to make a Valentine's Day card for Nelson, she quickly tells him that Jesus told his followers to "love thy enemy", despite recognising Nelson's bullying history with Bart. When Bart was being hunted by Jimbo, Kearney and Dolph for having an affair with Jimbo's girlfriend Shauna, Marge genuinely believed that they were friends with Bart and told them to wait. She also unintentionally ruined the marriage of Otto and then girlfriend Becky by telling her to make an ultimatum by making him choose between her and his his music. He chooses the latter in a heartbeat despite Marge thinking that he would choose Becky out of love.
Housewife: While she does have a few jobs over the show's run, she spends most of her time as a housewife.
Hypocrite: A significant part of her character, with it actually being a thing since season 1. On many occasions, she will call out others for their actions, despite being no better than them or doing so largely for her own sake.
Begs Homer to get rid of his gun, claiming she doesn't want a gun in her house. After Homer gives it to her to dispose of, she keeps it for herself.
In episode 9 of the first season, Marge basically has an affair with a man she met while bowling, and only got a change of heart when driving off to a sexual rendezvous with him. The VERY NEXT EPISODE, Marge finds a photo of Homer dancing (with no sexual overtones) with a belly dancer at a stag party he went to (with her knowledge), and proceeds to treat him highly condescendingly, throw him out of his own house, and act like he cheated on her.
Doubly so with Homer's platonic relationship with Lurleen Lumpkin another hundred or so episodes later, where she is against him spending any time with Lurleen (despite him being her manager) and treats it like he is cheating on her.
She supports gay rights and is proud of Homer for marrying gay couples, but when her sister comes out of the closet she refuses to accept her sexuality.
On one episode, when Lisa gets asylum in Canada and she even admits that she prefers Canada over the US for several reasons, Marge calls her a traitor and even plans to drag her back to the States by any means necessary. In another episode, Marge wants the whole family to move to Denmark due to its lifestyle.
Hypocritical Heartwarming: Sure she's a Clingy Jealous Girl who once compared Homer to a bike that needs locking up or other women will ride it, but when Helen Lovejoy makes a crack about his faithfulness, Marge gives her a Bitch Slap.
I Can Change My Beloved: Marge did this with Homer, and insists it worked and that now he's a "whole new person", despite the evidence that he's still an often-inconsiderate slob. Lisa's response is to just pretend to agree with her.
I Have No Son!: While she doesn't officially disown Bart nor kicks him out of the house, she either distanced herself from Bart, became so disappointed in Bart, or flat-out gave up on Bart at least four times. Three ("Marge Be Not Proud", "Bart the Mother" and "Peeping Mom") she had reason to (and in the first case was convinced it was for his own good), but one ("Love is a Many Splintered Thing") was for petty reasons.
Impossible Hourglass Figure: Inverted. In "Husbands and Knives", she got upset when she realises her hips were too wide and she had lost her "perfect" 26-26-26 figure.
Impossibly Low Neckline: Her regular dress. Once even lampshaded by a prison warden.
Warden: NOTHING IS KEEPING UP HER DRESS! ONLY HER MELONS!!!
Incorruptible Pure Pureness: Not really, and she'd be the first to admit she isn't, but Bart and Homer see her as such, Homer even thinking he should be killed for actually corrupting her.
Incredibly Lame Fun: Marge gets thrills out of monotonous activities such as household chores and evening walks (of which she tends to prefer the dullest route). The family actually tend to find doing Marge's ideas of fun more unbearable than Homer or Bart's troublemaking.
Informed Attractiveness: Marge was not designed with the intention of being attractive, and is in fact described as plain or even homely looking multiple times early on. However, as the writers became more aware of the Perverse Sexual Lust parts of their fan base had for her (and the Generic Cuteness of the art style making her not much different than other attractive characters), they turned her into a Dude Magnet who is way out of Homer's league, despite not altering her design at all.
Insistent Terminology: She always refers to intimate times with Homer as "snuggling."
Intimate Marks: In "Homer to the Max", Marge says she has a tattoo of Homer's name on her "You know". Implying it's on her lower back, an intimate spot, or a private area.
It's All About Me: Something she shares with Lisa. While usually not intentionally out of selfishness, Marge often makes efforts to prevent her family from doing things they like because it might embarrass her. Then again, the embarrassment ranges from dressing like a child or drinking at a party to hitting the Queen of England and angering Australia.
I Want Grandkids: Her greatest fear is dying without grandchildren. In "The Burns and the Bees", when Marge is asked what her greatest fear is, she instantly replies, "Never being a grandmother". Another episode has Marge, who believes she is about to be executed, despairing that she wouldn't see her children grow up and start their own families, etc.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She's an enabling bore who can be abusive in her own way and have her moments of deep stupidity, but she's (usually) a loving wife, her children will fully admit to feeling safe around her, and holds up wonderfully after having a very emotionally abusive childhood.
The Killjoy: Depending on the Writer she can go from simply just being too cautious to do something to outright refusing to let anyone else enjoy something if she doesn't, and forcing everyone to go along with her. As early as season 5, the whole town knows that if anyone's going to have an objection to an idea that everyone else is onboard with, it'll probably be Marge.
Knight Templar: Slips into this in some episodes when she goes too far to keep the family's life normal. A few episodes with the other family members questioning religion, for example, has her almost rival Ned in her zealotry.
Laughing at Your Own Jokes: She does this occasionally. She gives her best one liners when no one's around.
Leg Focus: When she and Homer get "frisky". This is explicitly mentioned by Lenny in one episode.
Lenny: She's got legs from here to yah-yah!
Letting Her Hair Down: Her motherly appearance comes primarily from her Beehive Hairdo making her look much older than she is. Whenever her hairstyle changes due to being wet, wearing a hat or otherwise trying a new look it is connected with her fanservice being ramped up.
Limited Wardrobe: Her standard outfit is a strapless green dress with a pearl necklace. On some occasions she wears a green jacket when going out for the evening. When a thief came into town he removed her necklace, showing indentations in her skin. She later revealed to have a lot of replica pearl necklaces, each one being a family heirloom.
Literal-Minded: Marge has shown multiple times to have a poor recognition of sarcasm and is sometimes literal-minded towards jokes.
For example, when Bart makes a joke about Homer's weight disrupting satellites, she still believes it to be true despite Homer telling her it was a joke.
Another example would be Marge becoming confused when Bart tells her that he was being sarcastic when he sarcastically clapped in celebration of Lisa's promotion to school president.
Living Emotional Crutch: Her marriage to Homer is what stops him from crossing a line. Homer loves Marge so much that he's willing to let many people (such as Patty and Selma) speak to him with such cruelty and callousness. It's fair to say that without Marge's support in Homer's life, he would become a Villain Protagonist due to his abusive behavior towards Bart, alcoholism, negligence of Maggie and poor connection with Lisa despite his unconquerable love for all of his children.
Love Makes You Crazy: Her possessiveness of Homer can lead her to become paranoid and a court actually finds her "insane". She suspects any woman who gets along well with Homer is actually trying to steal him away from her. She threatens to hurt Lurleen, is glad that Mindy lost her job, attempts to get rid of Julia (not the yandere one), and tries to kill Becky because she believes she is trying to take her place in the Simpson's family (although in the last case she was right). Marge can be downright terrifying.
Loving Parent, Cruel Parent: Downplayed. While both she and Homer are usually portrayed as ultimately loving parents, Marge is usually portrayed as the kinder of the two, lacking Homer's tendency to strangle Bart. She's also consistent, even in flaws, while Homer's being a giant kid can cause major issues.
Lust Object: Marge has gained attention from a majority of male characters like Moe, Mr. Burns and a number of celebrities. It probably helps that she's a housewife with a beehive hairdo that regularly wears a strapless dress.
Mama Bear: Any attack against her children, even though her son is a well-known troublemaker; Marge will go on the war path... even if you’re part of the 99 percent of Springfield. Don’t mess with the Simpson children in general. It also helps to know this same rules applies to Homer... most of the time.
Marital Rape License: She overpowers and rapes Homer in "Strong Arms of the Ma", and it's Played for Laughs, with occasional call backs showing she thinks she didn't do anything wrong.
Master of the Mixed Message: Marge is this to pretty much everyone. She presents herself as an overworked and under-appreciated housewife and mother despite repeatedly showing that she gets thrills out of monotonous activities such as household chores. She also becomes incredibly neurotic whenever she gets a chance to relax as seen in "Regarding Margie".
Meaningful Name: The name Marjorie means "pearl", which shows how valuable she is to the family, and also why she values her antique heirloom pearl necklace so much.
AM/FM Characterization: Her favorite singer is Tom Jones.
Misplaced Retribution: When it's her turn to have a Jerkass Realization, she'll usually explain that her lashing out at her husband and kids even when she knows they haven't done anything wrong this time, is frustration building up from her loneliness, childhood trauma and all the shit they have done.
Moral Guardian: In her more insufferable moments, she forces her sense of morality onto others when she does not possess the authority to do so.
Morality Pet: To the rest of the family. Whenever Bart, Lisa, and/or Homer did something too far, they'll know when their actions upsets Marge. Even Patty and Selma treat her better than the others, especially Selma.
Ms. Fanservice:
"Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy" has several moments showing Marge has an astounding body.
She becomes this in "Large Marge", in which she is accidentally given breast implants and becomes a model.
In "The Devil Wears Nada" after sexy pictures of her end up on a charity calendar.
Several of the Halloween specials have Fanservice scenes with her too.
In Real Life she appeared on Playboy posing semi-nude!
Ms. Vice Girl: Marge is normally a loving wife and mother, but suffers from a gambling addiction, which can occasionally pop up every now and then. More commonly she is also something of a finicky wet blanket, often unwilling to break from her standard comfort zone, which can make her rather overbearing and humourless. It says something that as often as the kids feel more comfortable around Marge than Homer, they actually find the latter's antics more tolerable than her fussy moods.
Mundane Object Amazement: Her dullness is often Played for Laughs. She gets excited over very mundane things, such as potatoes.
Named by the Adaptation: It's easy to forget that she was unnamed in the Tracey Ullman shorts.
Naughty by Night: Marge is both The Bore who gets excited by cleaning supplies, and a woman with a healthy sexual appetite. In "The Springfield Connection", when she puts cuffs on Homer, his initial reaction is to think sex games are happening.
Nervous Wreck: The antics of her family sometimes drive her to nervous breakdowns.
Never My Fault: Marge tends to blame herself most for situations that rely on Cant Get Away With Nothing, but if she's actually in the wrong, she can turn it around by Playing the Victim Card. Homer has done worse so she can do what she wants to him, Lisa likes her fads so Marge will put meat juice in her meals, Bart probably wants to be a little hellion so she can say I Have No Son!. Whether she realizes her mistake depends on the episode.
Nice Girl: In the earlier seasons, she was, barring her moments of hypocrisy and nagging, one of the nicest characters in the series (albeit having flipped out a few instances) as she showed patience for the family and tried treating them what was best for Homer, Bart, Lisa and Maggie. However, this was all deconstructed later.
Nightmare Fuel Station Attendant: She doesn't mean it, but she often scares the crap out of people around her.
No Name Given: In the Tracey Ullman shorts, she has no name, being credited either as "Mom" or "Mrs. Simpson" throughout the series' run. She received the name "Marge" for the first season of the spinoff series, and even then, early drafts of "Homer's Odyssey" named her "Juliet" instead.
Not Me This Time: A non-villainous example. When the town tries to legalize gambling, Mayor Quimby asks if anyone objects, and everyone turns to look at Marge, who's okay with it.
Not So Above It All: A trait prominent since the early days. For example, when Homer starts a food fight with the Flanders, Marge (along with Lisa) hesitates for a moment before joining in with the same glee as Homer and Bart. During "Rosebud", when the family are discussing what to do with Bobo, it's Marge who suggests extorting Mr. Burns, defensively asking "well, why can't I be greedy once in a while?" During "The Old Man and the Lisa", she actually manages to get two pretty solid burns in on Burns in the space of a minute.
Obnoxious Entitled Housewife: She tends to lapse into this behavior whenever she embarks on one of her moral crusades:
"Itchy & Scratchy & Marge" has her protest the eponymous cartoon for being too violent after Maggie hits Homer over the head with a mallet, something that could’ve been prevented if Marge had simply kept Maggie from watching the show, or kept a closer watch on her to prevent her from doing so.
In "Bart After Dark", she deems the presence of the Maison Derriere as a blight on Springfield due to its “total lack of morals”, and tries to have it torn down.
In "The Great Wife Hope", she claims that no one should be allowed to enjoy kickboxing simply because she personally disapproves of it due its violence, and later pickets the event outside of the stadium.
One True Love: "El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer" reveals her to be Homer's soul mate, and there are more than enough episodes that show that they were made for each other.
Only Known by Their Nickname: She's primarily called "Marge" by relatives and friends alike.
Only Sane Woman: If Lisa ends up caught in the craziness — for example with the Movementarians — expect Marge to take over instead. In fact, the straight man role is usually traded between Lisa and Marge, with the latter holding it more frequently in early episodes and almost always when it comes to anything Homer does. However, there are times Marge's Wide-Eyed Idealist and Moral Guardian qualities make her just as hopelessly crazy as the rest of Springfield.
Parental Substitute: Marge has often become a replacement mother for characters who have either been abandoned by their own parents, live in poverty or live in a household that lacks parental love. Examples of this include Nelson Muntz ("Sleeping with the Enemy") and Dwight ("I Don't Wanna Know Why the Caged Bird Sings"). It's also due to her motherly personality that she is unknowingly able to convince Simon ("Double, Double, Boy in Trouble") to stay with them after his troublesome first day of pretending to be Bart.
Parenting the Husband: To Homer.
Announcer: Attention, Marge Simpson: your son has been arrested.
Announcer: Attention, Marge Simpson: we've also arrested your older, balder, fatter son.
Pink Is Erotic: While trying to seduce Homer, she's known to wear a pink nightie or a pink dressing gown. When she modeled for Maxim magazine, she posed seductively while wearing a pink bandana. When she modeled for playboy, she parodied one of their previous models by wearing a pink see-through nightie while carrying doughnuts.
Playing the Victim Card: She tends to do this a lot. This trait of hers was looked at in "Homer and her Sisters", as she secretly likes them fighting because she gets to play the long-suffering one and have them all dependent on her. That dynamic of theirs isn't down to her, as much as they would like it to be, but she doesn't help and is very glad that she doesn't have to look at her own flaws.
Power Dynamics Kink: She admits power does “strange” things to her, and in “Homerland” when acting-weird Homer tops she’s delighted and calls him daddy. But she’s very happy to be the one in control, knowing how to tie a good knot and has cuffed him for fun before.
Progressively Prettier: Although Marge's appearance hasn't changed, how attractive she is stated to be has changed from housewife to centerfold. Also present in the original The Tracey Ullman Show shorts. Marge started out as quite dumpy, but quickly began slimming down.
Properly Paranoid: While Homer was oblivious to Lurleen's love, Marge is right in that she wants to sleep with him.
Same Clothes, Different Year: Certain depictions of her as a kid have her wear a dress similar to her present-day one. They even resemble Lisa's dress, only green.
Series Continuity Error:
During the episode "The Blue and the Gray" Marge is shocked to see gray hairs in her blue hair, even though it was established seasons before that her natural hair is gray and that she dyes it blue. Her hairstylist explains that her blue hair dye causes partial memory damage.
"Fear of Flying" established that Marge has (or had) a fear of flying, yet in the earlier episode "Mr. Lisa Goes to Washington", Marge got on a plane with no problems.
"[1]" established that she genuinely loved being with Homer as young adults, with nothing to imply she was thinking of leaving him. Yet, "[2]" explains that she was originally planning to leave him until learning about Bart's conception.
Ship Tease:
With Ned Flanders sometimes, but it doesn't go anywhere because she loves Homer. Occasionally she entertains the thought of having both of them.
It's sometimes implied that she has a crush on Homer's friend Lenny, even if she rarely interacts with him.
Show Some Leg: Marge once distracted Chief Wiggum by flashing her (temporarily surgically enhanced) breasts. Which Krusty referred to as "Mugumbos". Which happened to be the control word for Stampy the Elephant.
Sleeps in the Nude: There were several episodes in the early Seasons where she is shown to be sleeping in the nude instead of her nightwear, such as in "Burns Verkaufen Der Kraftwerk", "Colonel Homer", and "Bart's Inner Child". And this is without first having or preparing to have sex. note .
Stacy's Mom: Several young characters, such as Nelson and Milhouse, have admitted to finding her attractive.
Bart: My mom wears earrings. Do you think she's cool?
Milhouse: No, I think she's hot! ...Sorry, it just slipped out...
Stepford Smiler:
From very early on. Marge mentions in "Moaning Lisa" that her mother always told her to smile, otherwise people would judge her, though Marge couldn't bring herself to make Lisa do this. She frequently refuses to talk about subjects she doesn't like (such as one of her uncles going on a shooting spree). Her long-suppressed fear of flying is not helped by Marge's utter refusal to admit there actually is a problem, even when it's causing her to become increasingly neurotic.
More pronounced in the middle seasons, although it's understandable considering everyone's increasing Jerkassness. Comes to the fore in The Simpsons Movie where she admits that she can't overlook Homer's jerkass qualities anymore and actually gets to the point where she decides to leave him. This immediately shakes Homer out of his jerkass bravado, making him realise what the hell he's done wrong and immediately begin to set about putting it right.
Straight Man: Shares this role with Lisa, most of the time.
Stronger Than They Look: She occasionally displays superhuman strength. She has been seen lifting Homer off the ground easily several times, including picking him up and throwing him through the bedroom door to show him that Moe taught her the bum's rush and swinging him around in a circle during a dance contest; she also once effortlessly tossed a motorcycle to Homer up a flight of stairs. She also knocked Snake out with a garbage can lid.
Strong Family Resemblance: Looks the same as her mother when she was her age.
Textile Work Is Feminine: Marge would often be seen sewing in the Tracey Ullman shorts, and would sometimes do it in the actual show.
Thinks of Something Smart, Says Something Stupid: In "Simpsorama" (the Crossover with Futurama), Marge is introduced to Leela:
Marge: [thinking] Oh, don't mention her eye. Don't mention her eye.
Leela: [thinking] Don't mention her hair. Don't mention her hair.
Marge: I (Eye)... am so pleased to meet you.
Leela: Nice to be hair.
Token Good Teammate: She's the only nice one of the Bouvier sisters. Patty and Selma are much more cynical than she is. In terms of her own family, she alternates this role with Lisa, with her more conventional approach often rendering her acceptable to Springfield where her daughter's Soapbox Sadie antics fall flat. In "At Long Last Leave," this ironically gets her exiled from Springfield with the rest of the Simpsons: because her palatability and sympathetic nature caused the town to tolerate the rest of the family far longer than they should have, she's declared the worst offender of the bunch.
Token Religious Teammate: She is easily the most religious member of the family, as the others would likely not go to church if it wasn't for her.
Took a Level in Dumbass: While she was always prone to Not So Above It All moments, later seasons crank these up to a point where she plays the Only Sane Man much less regularly.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Once Flanderization kicked in, she's gone through this as much as the rest of the cast. From approximately season 20 onwards, Marge has been depicted as much more petty and manipulative over her family, alternating between trying to live out her dreams through Lisa and passive-aggressively guilt-tripping any family member who dares to be more successful than her into giving up said passion for her sake. She also verges towards being straight-up abusive towards Homer on occasion, even when he hasn't done anything, all while being pretty quick to contemplate cheating on him herself.
Troubled Abuser: Sometimes, after the first four seasons or so. It's to the point that Bart is glad that he gets physical abuse from Homer, instead of the psychological one Marge inflicts on Lisa. Like with Homer's abusiveness, a lot of this depends on the needs of the episode.
Turn the Other Cheek: Marge often tries to forgive her wrongdoers and can often be too forgiving. Her sisters, Patty and Selma, are the best examples of this as she always forgives them for bullying her in the past and harassing Homer. With Sideshow Bob, it depends on the episode as she'll sometimes forgive him for trying to murder her son and other times, she'd jump to protect Bart from Bob.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Hot Wife to Homer's Ugly Guy. It does show that Homer was better looking when they were dating, and early episodes has Homer bemoan his weight gain. The episode "The Italian Bob" even seems to reference it; when the end of the episode shows Marge and Homer taking a romantic gondola ride, the gondolier providing his services for the evening puts his own spin on the song That's Amore, much to Homer's annoyance.
Gondolier: ♪When a wife looks like that and her husband's so fat, that's immoral!♪
Unnamed Parent: In the Tracey Ullman shorts, Homer and Marge were credited as "Mr/Mrs Simpson" or "Mom/Dad". While Homer is referred to by his final name in the shorts themselves, Marge's name wouldn't be mentioned until the series itself.
Useless Bystander Parent: She provides the page image. Marge only ever offers token resistance when Homer abuses Bart, mainly in that she generally does not try to stop Homer whenever he strangles Bart (or when Lisa joins in to strangle Bart herself, or just mock and belittle him in general); the most Marge does is acknowledge the abuse is happening without actually doing anything to stop it. Occasionally veers into Honor Thy Abuser, even when Bart and/or Lisa is being mistreated by another kid or adult.
Violently Protective Girlfriend: Homer has a tendency to pick up a Distress Ball, and Marge will always come to save him. For all his obliviousness and occasionally feeling emasculated, he makes sure to let her know he really is grateful for her constant (physical and emotional) rescue. In “Wedding For Disaster”, Bart and Lisa weaponise this trait to make Selma and Patty pay for the third Homer/Marge wedding.
Vocal Dissonance: She's a tall and very beautiful woman in her 40s... with a raspy and croaky voice which makes her sound like she's in her 70s. This becomes more apparent after season 30, where Kavner's voice has grown even raspier with age, often making Marge sound like she's losing her voice.
Vocal Evolution: Marge's voice has gotten increasingly gravellier and raspier as Julie Kavner has aged. By Season 30, Marge's voice has gotten deeper and frequently sounds like she's losing her voice.
The Voiceless: In the episode "Krusty Gets Kancelled". She also never spoke in any Butterfinger commercials.
Weakness Turns Her On: She gives plenty of healthy (despite many frustrations) reasons why she loves Homer: his big heart, how he loves everything he loves so much, funny and a lot of fun, the fact that he constantly tries, how ultimately he's the same "adorable boy I married". But she has to admit that she also loves how dependent and clingy he is to her. But luckily he apparently gets secretly turned on when she's a Control Freak.
Wet Blanket Wife: Marge started off more as a Closer to Earth spouse for Homer, though she was eventually Flanderized into a more dull and neurotic character who tends to find the least enjoyable way of doing things the most acceptable. One episode lampshaded that Marge needs Homer's reckless antics for any excitement in her life, to the point where she ended up taking his place when a Jerkass Realization made him this trope instead. After the movie, he Took a Level in Kindness and she Grew a Spine, even if both were slow-going Character Development.
What Beautiful Eyes!: It was not until season 19 we find out the color of Marge’s eyes. They are hazel. Homer even wrote a song about her called “Beautiful Eyes.”
What Does She See in Him?: Frequently asked exactly why she stays with an insane, boorish drunken clod like Homer. Usually she's able to give an answer.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Flying, due to finding out her father was a stewardess as a child (and also because she never addressed the shame this caused her). Granted, her toy plane spontaneously combusting and getting shot at by a plane at that cornfield probably didn't help, either.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Marge naively believes in the best in people and often puts her faith in love conquering all. For example, she believes everyone should be married or in a relationship despite Lisa telling her that some people prefer to be single or alone.
Women Are Wiser: While played straight for a long time, a lot of episodes deconstruct this one. Marge banks a lot of her self-esteem on being "the good one", but also resents the fact that she has to play stern mom to Homer's "fun dad", but she would rather have Homer's entertaining insanity than anything else.