Aborted Arc: Hs brief stint as Bart's new teacher, until Miss Peyton came along.
Abusive Dad: Not in a violent manner, rather in the over-protective variety. This was something that became prominent largely after the first few seasons, when the writers began making him and his family more flawed.
Ned's sons are highly sheltered and overprotected. Rod and Todd are oversensitive and have poor social skills towards others. They are also religiously bigoted and seem to be sexually confused, as they plan to lose their virginities to each other in their vow of abstinence. In Bart Has Two Mommies, Rod and Todd reveal that Marge makes them feel genuinely happy because she gives them more freedom than Ned.
A direct example is in "Todd, Todd, Why Hast Thou Forsaken Me"; Ned disowns Todd for having a crisis of faith, he prays for God to punish Todd for his lack of faith and sends him to live with the Simpsons so they'd make Todd afraid of God. The reason why Todd had a crisis of faith was that he was missing his mother and confused about why such a tragedy would take place.
That being said, in the movie, him spending time with Bart shows that he's capable of being a downright Good Parent by contrast with Bart's actual father Homer. However, many abusive parents treat non-familial kids better than their biological kids.
The Ace: Early on, he always found success in areas where Homer failed and generally had a perfect life. Subverted in later episodes, where he goes through multiple losses and failures that are arguably worse than anything that Homer has had to go through.
Affably Evil: If he's a villain in a Treehouse of Horror short (such as when he turns out to be Satan, or becomes the dictator of the world in an alternate timeline), he's still as genial as he usually is.
All-Loving Hero: Ned is an incredibly compassionate and all-selling person who is willing to lend a helping hand to everyone. He is even considered a saint for this reason.
Always Someone Better: Is this to Homer, which is why Homer doesn't like him (add to the fact that Flanders has a prettier wife — or used to — and kids that aren't a pain in the ass to him). Was played up a lot more in the early seasons.
That said, this is actually somewhat zigzagged from a neutral point of view, given Homer's own accomplishments, as well as how Marge and their kids are more outgoing and reliable than Ned's family.
Ancestral Name: His Beatnik dad is also named Nedward "Ned" Flanders.
As the Good Book Says...: Flanders quotes the Bible often.
Beta Couple: With Maude, until her death, to Homer and Marge.
Beware the Nice Ones: The nicest guy you could ever wish to meet, but as his Precision F-Strike shows, you do NOT want to push him too far. He straight-up knocks out Homer with one punch after he relentlessly teases him! On two different occasions!
Cartwright Curse: Ned Flanders has been twice-widowed. His first wife, Maude, was killed in a freak accident by a T-shirt cannon. Later on he married Edna Krabappel. But in an episode following the death of her voice actress Marcia Wallace, Ned is seen wearing a black armband and looking at a picture of Edna, revealing she died off-camera.
Catchphrase: "Hidely-ho, neighborino!", "Okely-dokely!" and "Diddly!"
Cerebus Retcon: His Verbal Tic is his way of expressing repressed anger.
Characterization Marches On:
In his earlier appearances his personality had drifted towards being nice and meek. It's sort of funny to watch his first appearance, where he's so indifferent/oblivious to Homer's obvious financial problems that it reaches Jerkass proportions and he actually seems fully deserving of Homer's enmity.
He wasn't even a devout Christian. Season 1 makes no mention of his faith, just that he's Homer's well-off neighbor. Season 2 does have him quote the Bible on one occasion.
Throughout the early seasons, even when the Simpsons' antics caused trouble, Ned normally saw them as good people and his dear friends, privately praising Homer and Marge as "good parents" in "Home Sweet Homediddly-Dum-Doodily". Nowadays, he's much more judgmental, and it's heavily hinted on many occasions that he secretly hates Homer. This can at least partly be explained by how the Simpsons have gotten much more nasty over the years, as well as how Maude died.
Clark Kent Outfit: Despite appearing to be slightly paunchy when wearing his usual sweater, Ned is actually incredibly ripped, which is genuinely shown off whenever he wears a different outfit.
The Confidant: For Marge when she feels bad about her family treating her like an afterthought, and Homer will confide in him about really trying to be better.
Costumes Change Your Size: He appears far heavier when wearing his outfit than he actually is.
Cranky Neighbor: Initially averted, but began to play this more straight due to Flanderization, where he'd gradually become less tolerant of Homer. In several later-season episodes, he has reported Homer to the police for minor stuff (for example, he reports him for having sex with Marge in the treehouse in "Kamp Krustier").
Depending on the Writer:
Discounting the trope he's named for, he can be a perfectly nice but boring guy in one episode, someone who can be pretty fun in another (he's been shown drinking and brewing beer, hosting BBQ parties, and even plays billiards in his house), or an obnoxious religious fundamentalist.
Homer's relationship with him can range from Sitcom Arch-Nemesis to Vitriolic Best Buds to outright wishing him dead. Flanders himself can go from genuinely seeing Homer as a good friend to being full of contempt.
Dork in a Sweater: Overly cheery and dorky, and always seen wearing a bright green sweater with a pink collar.
Drowning My Sorrows: OOC Is Serious Business in "Todd Todd Why Hast Thou Forsaken Me" as he comes into Moes' for booze because Todd doesn't believe and "I'm losing everything".
Egocentrically Religious: Sometimes becomes this in his Christian overzeal, sometimes showing a condescending view of God's treatment towards others or praying for his good will for even minor things like winning a game of bowling. He's usually not nearly as bad as Homer thinks he is however (who actually turned into a far more prominent example in one episode).
Extreme Doormat: He's a bit of a pushover, and easily lets Homer insulting him or taking advantage of him. In their first meeting, when he asks Homer if he needs something, Homer agrees to "borrow" the TV tray that Ned has just bought for himself. Eight years later the tray is still in the Simpsons' living room.
Fatal Flaw: Ned's flaws are that he's robotically devoted to his faith and unwilling to take action. He was regularly trampled on by Homer and his family and never took the initiative to stand up for himself. When Ned does retaliate, he feels way too guilty about it and tries to be bigger person because his faith tells him to do so, regardless of the context. In Viva Ned Flanders, he has a mid-life crisis when he realises he wasted his life by doing nothing exciting or thrilling.
Fictional Fan, Real Celebrity: He's a big fan of The Beatles, partially because of their "Bigger Than Jesus" comment.
Fire-Forged Friends: A one sided case with Homer. In "When Flanders Failed", Homer is shown horrified at Ned's predicament, and helps him solve his financial problem. This is the first time Homer is shown treating him as a friend.
Flanderization: Trope Namer. Interestingly, he was flanderized twice.
Pre-flanderization, Ned was a friendly, generous, ideal neighbor (although he could often come off as slightly snooty during the first two seasons), who enjoyed going to church on Sundays and had a well-behaved, friendly, generous family. He was better off than Homer, simply because he didn't spend money frivolously, which is why Homer resented Flanders - Homer was jealous of Flanders' well-earned fortune and blissful family life, especially since Flanders unintentionally rubbed it in at times. While Ned certainly had inkling flaws as he appeared more, it came more from his generally goody-goody nature than his religious zeal, which while comical even by this point, this era's Ned was actually quite level headed about, having no problems drinking a few beers, making a few indulgent buys like an RV or expensive sneakers, and having a steady Pharmaceutical job. In one early Halloween episode he even showed up at the Simpson's house sporting a decapitated zombie costume, something his later iterations would have found completely unthinkable.
Ned's first flanderization was into an obsessively pious, painfully generous, obnoxiously friendly milquetoast who was still a pretty decent person (perhaps unhealthily so considering the kind of people Springfieldians are in general), if incredibly boring. He also became harsher towards others. The episode "Hurricane Neddy" saw Ned snap and verbally attack his neighbors while explaining both his Verbal Tic and obsession with being nice, and the episode "Viva Ned Flanders" saw his boring, milquetoast ways get pitied, rather than celebrated.
His second - and most damning - flanderization took his obsession with Christianity and expanded it, turning him into an intolerant bigot who demanded a lot of respect for his own religion while openly mocking everyone else's, such as Apu's Hinduism (the episode "Midnight Rx" has even Homer stunned by what Ned says of Hinduism to Apu's face). This also turned "Why does Homer hate him?" into "No wonder Homer hates him". He also became highly resentful of Homer mocking his faith and sponging him off (though by this time Flanders was no longer better off than the Simpsons).
It's worth noting that Maude was often the pious representation of the show's Christianity, seeing as she was friends with Helen Lovejoy. In "Bart of Darkness", she even went to Bible camp due to a fear of not being judgmental enough. She's also highly suspicious of Marge in "Marge in Chains", despite Ned totally acting the opposite. With Maggie Roswell's departure, and Maude and Helen no longer around to "think of the children", Ned took their place.
The writing staff have stated that Flanders was deliberately changed in response to the increased influence of religion in politics. So Flanders' character was essentially derailed because The Simpsons writers wanted a Straw Character to mock. Portrayal of Flanders reached the point of full-on anti-Christian, and later on Flanders was ratcheted back towards his first flanderization of being a nice, yet kinda boring religious man after his marriage to Edna Krabappel.
Unfortunately, with Krabappel having died, Flanders was once again reversed into being bitter, depressed, and increasingly hostile to anything that goes against his increasingly fundamentalist religious beliefs. For example, when Todd has a crisis of faith due to losing memories of his mother, Ned kicks him out of his home so he'd be scared by the Simpsons so much he'll have no choice but to believe in God again. Episodes like"Warrin' Priests: Part 2" show that even other nice devout Christians such as Bode are disturbed by his self-centered crusades.
Foil: To Homer. Homer is a Jerk with a Heart of Gold, Ned is a Nice Guy. The Simpson family is often impoverished and highly dysfunctional, but also resourceful and show their love to each other in rather unique ways. The Flanders family is well-off and loving towards each other in a typical Christian manner, but are normally helpless against chaotic situations. Homer's wife is alive while both of Ned's are deceased. Homer couldn't care less about religion to the point of sleeping in church, Ned is a religious fundamentalist. Homer is fat and bald. Ned is muscular and has a full head of hair. It's heavily implied, if not outright proven, that Homer is on good terms with God, akin to friends. Flanders, on the other hand, constantly worries about earning God's wrath, sometimes to an unhealthy extent.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Later seasons like to show that Ol' Neddy is disliked by nearly everyone around to point where he went from Homer’s punching bag to Moe’s punching bag to everyone’s punching bag.
The Fundamentalist: In the early days, he was just a religious man who was so nice (and a bit boring) that Homer couldn't stand it. Later, it is implied by Rod and Todd in one episode that his reckless zeal is the direct result of "Daddy needing a new Mommy".
Gag Penis: Debatable. Homer's dating video for Ned had his penis digitally blurred. The blurs reached to the bottom of the screen. Either Flanders really is gifted downstairs or Homer did that to entice the female audience. In one episode where Flanders plays a nude Adam for a biblical video, he has a huge fig leaf to cover his private parts. In another he comments on how impractical foot-long hot dogs are (referring to actual hot dogs), while Maude adds that they indeed are "uncomfortable".
Gleeful and Grumpy Pairing: He's the Gleeful to Homer Simpson's Grumpy; he is very jovial and kind, even when he's being mistreated, and has two well-behaved children. Homer abhors him out of both jealousy for his good lifestyle and popularity, as well as Ned's insufferably pious and goody-goody demeanor. Homer is also quick to get angry, especially when his three children (particularly Bart) misbehave.
Good Cannot Comprehend Evil: In "When Flanders Failed" he hilariously interprets all of Homer's blatantly Jerkass comments as well-intentioned advice about his business.
Grew a Spine: In early seasons, he was a pushover at best and submissive at worst towards Homer and everyone else; he'd pretty much let them walk over him than be a bother to them. In later seasons, he is much more capable of standing up to others, even though he'd prefer it to be his last option.
Happily Married: With Maude, until her death, they were always a happy couple with little to no drama.
When he was married to Edna until her death off-screen.
Hates Their Parent: Ned Flanders hates his parents, who are beatniks, because he doesn't like beatniks. Them being horrifically negligent, to the point where they couldn't even pay enough attention to their son to discipline him, probably didn't help.
The Heart: Although the townspeople are usually upset by his excessive decency, they still follow his example when their immorality goes too far. He also becomes a peacemaker in neighborly conflicts and always convinces all of Springfield to give the Simpsons another chance.
Hidden Depths: He has a lot of anger in him, loves the Beatles and is not above feeling envious when Homer gets undeserved praises.
Incorruptible Pure Pureness: In the early seasons at least. After Maude's death, not so much.
Jerkass Ball: Depending on the Writer. He generally appears be a nice guy, and in many episodes he is a genuinely nice guy. However, due to Flanderization, in other episodes, he's actually a obsessive religious jerk.
Knight Templar: At his worst. When it involves something he takes a religious stance about, he is unshakable in pursuing his goal.
Lack of Empathy: Will often annoy people by being relentlessly cheerful during stressful times in their lives, mostly Homer though other characters aren't immune to this. In particular it never seems to occur to him that Reverend Lovejoy may not want to frequently receive phone calls from him during his downtime about whatever sin he seems to think he's committed.
Last-Name Basis: Homer usually calls him by his last name.
Limited Wardrobe: Lampshaded by Homer: "I'm a big four eyed lame-o. I wear the same stupid sweater everyday and…" Doubles as Hypocritical Humor on Homer's part.
Loved by All: Ned has a tendency to be considered this by Springfield, especially in earlier seasons. For example, in When Flanders Failed most of the neighborhood came to his BBQ party and when his Leftorium was going bankrupt all it took was Homer telling some people about Ned being in hot water for them to come over to and help him.
Minnesota Nice: While it's unknown if Ned is a Minnesotan himself, but he has a some sort Midwestern sounding accent and is a Nice Guy in general (unless you are mean to him to the point he can't take it anymore).
Mr. Fanservice: Not at all normally, but whenever his physique is shown off, expect a lot of focus to be drawn towards how amazingly (and surprisingly) good shape he's in. He is the Trope Namer for Stupid Sexy Flanders, after all.
Nerd Glasses: His round, thin-rimmed spectacles denote his dorky and cheerful demeanor.
Nerd Hoard: He has a massive, secret cache of The Beatles memorabilia.
Never My Fault: Flanders is this as a result of being Egocentrically Religious. He will often do incredibly irresponsible things under the belief that God would protect him, such as sinking his whole life's savings into a store that only caters to 1/9th of the population in "When Flanders Failed" while doing nothing to promote the store himself, or not buying homeowners insurance in "Hurricane Neddy".
Nice Guy: Well before his Flanderization was established, Ned was simply the nice guy that lived next door. While his Holier than Thou attitude is played up more and more in later episodes, he is still shown to be a fundamentally good, if misguided, person no matter the circumstances.
Noble Male, Roguish Male: Occasionally plays this with Homer.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: He does attempt to follow the Christian faith and be a kind neighbor, even renting out his room to people who need it. Unfortunately for him, many of the people of Springfield have a tendency to take advantage of his kindness and make it even worse. This eventually reached a breaking point when, after he allowed some college girls to rent out one of the guest rooms in his house, they ended up repaying his kindness by filming a softcore webcam video called "sexy slumber party" without Ned's knowledge, and Homer also leaked this to every single person in the town, to the extent that, when Ned Flanders ousts the college girls out of the room upon finding out about this, they cheer the girls on, thus shocking him about how all this time, the townspeople actually mocked him behind his back.
No Man Should Have This Power: In "To Surveil with Love", Ned takes charge of a surveillance system and he becomes insufferable and soon realises that he caused Bart and Homer to create the chaos corner. He agrees to help Homer destroy the cameras once he realises that he tried to play god by forcing people to abide by the rules by nagging.
Oblivious to Hatred: Mostly towards Homer
He is always friendly to Homer, despite all the times he tells him to shut up or go away and borrows his stuff without returning them, and in "When Flanders Failed" interprets Homer's mocking of the Leftorium as a sincere attempt to warn him about gambling his family's future on the idea. However, if Flanders is truly oblivious varies Depending on the Writer since some episodes show Ned is fully aware of how much Homer dislikes him, but puts up with it for the sake of being a good Christian.
In fairness, while Homer has always been annoyed with Flanders, the early seasons never went as far as for him to wish for his neighbor to die, best shown in "When Flanders Failed". In contrast, newer seasons show Homer being much more antagonistic, which might have tipped Flanders.
Even Homer himself calls Ned out on this. When Ned is in the asylum getting treatment for his long-ignored anger issues, Ned just smiles and laughs off all of Homer's attempts to get him to vent. Homer eventually gets fed up.
Homer: Aw that's it! You just can't insult this guy! You call him a moron and he just sits there, grinning moronly.
Flanders: Hi, neighbor!
Odd Name Out: "This is Maude, Rod, Todd, and I'm Ned!"
Older Than They Look: Ned looks around Homer's age. note  However, "Viva Ned Flanders" outright confirms he's 60 years old. The 2018 episode "My Way or the Highway to Heaven" shows he was an adult when the Apollo 14 moon landing happened in 1971, which would conservatively put him at no younger than 65 years old. How does he retain his youthful appearance? By following the "three Cs" — clean living, chewing thoroughly, and a daily dose of vitamin church.
Out-of-Character Moment: In Itchy And Scratchy The Movie, Flanders is seen first in line for the titular movie. Even before Ned's Flanderization into a aggressively Christian fundamentalist killjoy, he was shown to dislike the show due to its mean spirited nature as early as season 2.
Pals with Jesus: Even though his religious zeal didn't develop until later seasons, even the early seasons had Ned being in obvious favor with God, to the point that politely stating skyward "It's me, Ned" helped him win a bowling match (and shock Homer in the butt for mocking Ned) and a quick prayer to God helped save his son from being swept up by a river.
Parental Favoritism: Ned appears to favor Todd more than Rod as he shares more activities with him and entrusts with certain tasks (such as being in charge of the car while he talks to Homer in "When Flanders Failed" and asking Todd to shoot him if he tries to get back into the Bunker in "Bart's Comet").
Parental Neglect: His parents were beatniks who, although they were frustrated with his behavior, didn't believe in rules or discipline, or pay much attention to him. He resents them for it.
Parental Substitute: He's been known to serve as the wholesome father figure the Simpson kids usually don't have, compounding Homer's insecurities about his own parenting. In "Better Off Ned," he similarly takes Nelson under his wing to make up for the failings of his Disappeared Dad.
Parting-Words Regret: "I can't believe my last words to (Maude) were 'no footlongs'."note 
Phrase Catcher: "Stupid Flanders". It had gotten to the point that even Homer believes his first name is "Stupid", like in "Replaceable You".
Roz: Who told you?
Homer: I can't say, but his initials are S.F.
Roz: Stupid Flanders.
Pink Is Erotic: In Alone Again Natura Diddily, Homer's dating video for Ned has shades of this; the video shows a shirtless Ned doing some gardening with pink flowers and he's wearing a pink shower cap as his footlong penis is in full display (albeit censored).
Politically Incorrect Hero: Not originally, but it's become a thing from Flanderization. In spite of his Nice Guy attitude, he occasionally shows homophobia and intolerance towards other religions.
The Pollyanna: Definitely. Now that he's twice a widower, it might get worse.
Precision F-Strike:
"Hurricane Neddy" has one. Well, for Flanders, anyway.
"OH, HELL, DIDDLY-DING-DONG CRAP! CAN'T YOU MORONS DO ANYTHING RIGHT?!"
In "Oh C'mon All Ye Faithful," he lets out what Professor Frink refers to as an "F-torpedo" after being led to believe that Frink has taken him to an untested depth in his submarine and that they're both about to die. (It's covered by a Sound-Effect Bleep.)
Professor Frink: Okay, I guess you say that now.
Promotion to Opening Titles: He is added to the house pan shot in season 2, though he is removed in the HD intro.
Rage Breaking Point: In the episode "Hurricane Neddy", the Flanders' house gets destroyed by a hurricane, and he isn't impressed with the rather shoddy result of the rest of the townspeople's efforts to rebuild it for him. He tries to be nice as usual, but when his glasses break when he tries to clean them, that is the last straw: he snaps and goes on a tirade, delivering a mass "The Reason You Suck" Speech to everyone present. Particularly notable in this case, because he'd been building up his rage for decades. Hell, it's retconned as the reason he has his Verbal Tic.
Ridiculous Procrastinator: Inverted: He manages to start, and finish, his tax returns as early as New Year's Day, which is exactly 105-106 days (depending on whether the year is a leap year or not) before the last day of taxes (April 15). It should also be noted that he is the only one, or at least one of the few, Springfielders to actually deliver their taxes before the deadline (even the private accountants wait the last moment), as the episode that revealed this also has what is implied to be everyone in Springfield rushing to the Post Office to get their Tax Returns in at the last possible moment.
Screams Like a Little Girl: Revealed he can do this in "Bart of Darkness". He can also sing like one, which Bart finds very disturbing.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Sensitive Guy to Homer's Manly Man.
Sex God: In one episode he has sex with a movie star who is in town to shoot a film. He tells her that the first one's free, but if she wants any more she'll have to marry him. She almost does.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: To Homer, although it's very one-sided by Homer, who resents Ned for being more successful for him and occasionally rubbing it in unintentionally. That said, it's shown that Homer (at least in the early seasons) doesn't truly hate Flanders, and actually sees him as a good man and friend deep down.
Stepford Smiler: Retconned into this.
"Hurricane Neddy" reveals that his niceness and his Gosh Dang It to Heck! Verbal Tic is from being spanked every day for a full year while in therapy to curb his violent behavior brought on by his beatnik parents who didn't raise him right (or at all).
In a rare moment of honesty for both of them, Homer asks Ned how he manages to stay happy despite all he’s been through. Ned replies that God and his boys are all he’s really got, especially after Edna passed away, and has to stay cheerful for them.
Strawman Political: In later episodes. It's justified, however, when you take into account that a few times, his attempts at being a good neighbor often result in his good nature being exploited.
Stronger Than They Look: He is surprisingly muscular under his sweater and effortlessly caught a punch from a Jerk Jock.
Stupid Sexy Flanders: Trope Namer, where in "Little Big Mom", Homer couldn't get the image of Ned wiggling his well-toned Spandex-clad butt while saying "Feels like I'm wearing nothing at all!" out of his head when he was trying to remember the ski instructor's advice.
Token Good Teammate: In the two instances where the entire town turns against the Simpsons (the movie and "At Long Last, Leave"), Ned is the only one to side in favor of the family. And both times the rest of the Springfield citizens kick his ass to silence him.
Took a Level in Badass: By the episode "The Squirt and the Whale", Ned has officially stopped taking crap from Homer.
Took a Level in Jerkass: In later seasons, he became more of a religious elitist who openly mocked other religions while refusing to take criticism himself. He can also be a jerk to others outside of religion.
Turn the Other Cheek: Since he's a parody of the overly religious man, he's insanely nice and forgiving even when Homer is openly antagonistic towards him for no reason. Downplayed in later episodes (like "Bull-E") where he's not always willing to forgive that easily.
Unknown Rival: He's often oblivious to the fact that Homer is jealous of him and trying to manipulate him, making their "rivalry" pretty much one-sided on Homer's part.
Verbal Tic: Ned peppers ran-diddly-andom words with odd sounds like "diddly" and "doodly". Later revealed to be his way of dealing with his repressed anger. Given how often he tends to utter them, one could infer that the antics of the people around him have him seemingly locked in a state of Tranquil Fury.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Homer. While Ned is nothing but pleasant towards his neighbor, Homer normally reacts with rage and jealousy whenever forced to interact with him. In "When Flanders Failed", however, Homer reveals that he actually does care about Flanders deep down, not only regretting his poor treatment towards Flanders, but actually saving him from financial ruin. Since then, several other episodes show Homer interacting with Flanders as something of a friend, if usually in a rather jerkish way.
Ironically, in season 6 of "Hurricane Neddy", Ned states that he considers Homer to be a horrible person, with his opinion souring even more with each passing season. Despite this, both men have been shown to genuinely care and look out for each other countless times, to a point where they could be regarded as Fire-Forged Friends by later episodes.
You Need to Get Laid:
His own sons have said this to his face, agreeing that he's taking Kent Brockman's (accidental) swear too far and he's in need of "a new mommy".
God himself also appears to have this outlook, in A Star is Born Again a convenient gust of wind blows away all of Ned's bible quotes when he has trouble deciding whether or not to have sex with Sara Sloane. Ned, satisfied with the remaining quote, is eager to do the deed.