Adipose Rex: Depending on the writer, Nelson was the leader of the bullies due to his ability to fight but in later seasons, he's a subordinate to Jimbo.
Amazon Chaser: Sometimes, he falls in love with female bullies.
Ambiguously Bi: Heavily downplayed, but at one point Lisa comments that those who bully others for being gay are often hiding their own homosexual tendencies, and he immediately gets so nervous he jumps out of a moving bus to avoid any further discussion. However, he's only shown confirmed interest in women.
Antagonist in Mourning: Right up there with Bart as one of Mrs. Krabappel's most disruptive students, yet he admits that he misses her in "The Man Who Grew Too Much".
Betty and Veronica: The Veronica to Milhouse's Betty for Lisa's Archie.
The Bully: Introduced this way, though Hidden Depths and Character Development have led to this trope being downplayed. In most recent episodes, he can end up being just an average guy in Bart's social circle who likes to taunt people (with the occasional punch thrown).
Bully Turned Buddy: Started out as a bully and antagonist to Bart and Lisa, but in later seasons he befriended Bart and even dated Lisa. However, it also depends on the episode, and Nelson can still revert to being an antagonist, though usually much more of a Friendly Enemy sort than on the level of his earliest appearances.
Captain Ersatz: Seems to be based on Bender from The Breakfast Club Groening says he was named after Bender's actor, Judd Nelson.
Catchphrase: "Haw-haw!"
Character Development: Though it eventually led to Menace Decay, Nelson has become softer and is often one of Bart's friends now, while the position of bullying tormentor having been mostly passed onto Jimbo, Kearney and Dolph. Nelson's mother has cleaned up her act and his Disappeared Dad has come back, though both of these things have been undone or contradicted and his home life has generally still been portrayed as hectic.
Characterization Marches On: It was suggested that his bullying was encouraged by his father in "Brother from the Same Planet", but it was later determined that it was a result of a broken household.
Cock Fight: Depending on the episode, sometimes Nelson still has feelings for Lisa which results in him wanting to prove himself. He gets into a rivalry with Brendan in "Haw-Haw Land" and in the future, Nelson and Milhouse are often depicted as part of a love triangle with Lisa, and in one future she implies that cheats on Milhouse with Nelson. Or, at least, contemplates the idea.
Depending on the Writer:
Whether Nelson is Bart's friend, or his enemy can change from episode to episode, especially in the early years.
Whether Jimbo and the other bullies are his friends or not can change too.
Determinator: If something embarrassing happens to someone he knows, no matter where they are or how disconnected he is to the situation, he will find a way to laugh at them.
Disproportionate Retribution: On one occasion, Nelson took offense to Bart "learning on his own".
Dog-Kicking Excuse: Nelson doesn't have a reason to bully the other kids, he just does it because he enjoys it. It is implied several times that he bullies others because he lives in poverty, his father walked out on him, and his mom and teachers are dismissive of him.
The Dreaded: He was this to the other kids in the early seasons.
Enemy Mine: A couple of times has had to work with Martin — much to his chagrin.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: He loves his mother despite her many shortcomings and also has a surprisingly good relationship with Marge, who once briefly served as a Parental Substitute.
Even Bullies Have Standards:
During his bully days, he once punched Bart in the stomach for "besmirching an innocent girl's name".
In similar incidents, he attacked Bart for "wasting Teacher's valuable time" and "taking credit for other people's work."
He's against flag burning, especially the US one, and even wrote an impassioned about the evils of it in the second episode of season 3.
He won't pick on disabled kids. When a blind kid bumped into him, he immediately dropped his anger when he realized he was blind and offered to protect him from anyone who would sink so low as to bully him.
When Milhouse's parents split, he actually offers his sympathy.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: He takes great pride in his grandfather who sentenced 47 men to death.
Fat Bastard: He is a big fat bully (though he does have some moments of decency, especially when he's interacting with Lisa).
Freudian Excuse: The main reason why Nelson is the way he is is that he is from a poor neighborhood, is neglected by his mother, has a Disappeared Dad, and is looked down upon by his peers and teachers even though he is implied to have high potential.
Friendly Enemy: How well he and Bart get along depends on the episode. He is introduced as THE bully in school and Bart has to face him down, but over time their similar personalities often show them doing pranks together (especially compared to Dolph, Kearney and Jimbo, older delinquents who rarely are friendly with Bart).
Gang of Bullies: Usually he bullies alone, but in early seasons he had two unnamed lackeys nicknamed "The Weasels", though as time went on he replaced them with the more developed Jimbo, Kearney, and Dolph.
Genius Bruiser: He is large and, as noted above, he is implied to have high potential (although the school fails to recognize it). He was also once shown to be very good at planning, actually giving Marge some tips on how to organize a method to get rid of a sport when she decided to get rid of mixed wrestling.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Aside from laughing at everybody, his bullying schtick is to beat up people for very minor reasons. Often this is combined with Disproportionate Retribution, through making said reasons comically righteous (such as wasting Mrs. Krabappel's time).
Hidden Depths:
Even in episodes when his bullying hasn't been sidelined, he was still quite gentlemanly to women, including female authority figures like Ms. Krabappel and Marge.
He has a noted fondness for the work of Andy Williams.
In "Lisa on Ice", Principal Skinner announces that the only subject he isn't failing is Home Economics. Nelson immediately tells him to shut up.
In "The Great Wife Hope", Nelson admits (after having been beaten by Bart in a UFC-like mixed martial arts cage match) that he wants to be an event planner as an adult. Marge suggests he could do Lisa's wedding one day and Nelson responds "I'd like that!"
In one episode him and Bart becoming best friends plays out his connections around school as like being part of The Mafia.
Played for Laughs in "Homer the Whopper": while Bart and Milhouse remark that Comic Book Guy is also this trope when reading his self-published comic book, Nelson notes that "Still waters run deep", before simultaneously doing ballet and using spraycans to graffiti Guernica onto a wall with the likenesses of Springfield Elementary staff members.
I Just Want to Have Friends: Nelson is revealed to have no friends at all. Due to this, he becomes obsessed with Bart Simpson.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: In later seasons he's been shown to bully kids for relatively altruistic reasons like "wasting teacher's time". Lisa serves as a Morality Pet to him to some extent, a combination of Ship Tease and him demonstrating unusual respect towards women.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Sometimes this, in "Lisa's Date with Density" he went right back to the bullies and lied to Lisa, and stated he wasn't going to stop being a bully even after Bart reunited his family.
Bart: So now that you're happy again, I guess you won't beat me up at school anymore.
Nelson: I wish it were that simple. I really do.
Kevlard: He's a fat student and incredibly durable for his age as shown in Martin Prince's funeral where he gets attacked by Dolph, Kearney, and Jimbo but the punches neither phase him nor break his concentration.
Kids Are Cruel: Initially, but also still a decent amount of the time after, especially as he shows up to laugh at others all across Springfield instead of just in school, though his initial edge was steadily rounded out a bit.
Menace Decay:
The Nelson of today isn't nearly as intimidating compared to the Nelson of the earlier episodes. In his first appearance he was so fearsome Bart had to band together an army to stand up to him because the school was so terrified of him, and before that he regularly beat Bart bloody after school. That being said, he is still generally shown to be a tough kid, just never quite The Dreaded again, as he's long been portrayed with far more sympathetic and vulnerable qualities and can even be an ally to Bart or Lisa.
Nelson's imposing presence in "Bart the General" is largely thanks to being a story focused from Bart's perspective as his classmate and bullying victim who shares a playground with him almost every day - of course he'd seem invincible and loom over Bart, but even within said episode he's not nearly so menacing when it's Herman or Marge he's sharing a scene with. While his own Character Development is certainly a factor, a good deal of Nelson's decline as a threat would be inevitable as he shows up more in other plots around the older cast or authority who a simply brutish and petty school bully couldn't cast such a shadow over, even Homer or Skinner (the latter of which is noticeably kept uninvolved in the conflict of his introduction).
Named After Someone Famous: He was named after Judd Nelson.
Overused Running Gag: His catch phrase of guffawing at anything has been noted to be this in latter-series episodes like "To Surveil With Love".
Lisa: [after Nelson laughs at her] Your mocking, through its overuse, has lost its power.
Nelson: [reluctant] Yeah, you may be right.
Parent Never Came Back from the Store:
His dad ran off by saying he was going to the store. Subverted, as he actually gone to the store and intended to come back when done but had a peanut allergy and was abducted into The Freakshow because of it.
In one Flash Forward, Nelson is shown to use this excuse for his own kids.
Parental Abandonment: His dad left him long ago.
Pet the Dog:
Usually towards Lisa. When he goes to live with the Simpsons for a time, he sees that Sherri and Terri's constant teasing has really affected her, so he proceeds to bully/prank them.
In the episode "Wild Barts Can't Be Broken", when the kids all break curfew to sneak into the drive-in to see The Bloodening, Nelson kicks Milhouse in the butt to get him through a hole in the fence, while pulling it back as much as possible to make it easier for Lisa to crawl through.
He makes friends with a blind kid named Kevin when the fourth grade classes are temporarily merged in "Stealing First Base":
Nelson: (gasp) You're blind?! (to the class) If anyone messes with this kid, I will destroy them!
He tries to comfort Milhouse when his parents get divorced.
Promotion to Opening Titles: He and his Weasels are added to the house pan shot in season 2, though they are removed in the HD intro.
Real Men Wear Pink:
"The thing about huckleberries is, once you've had fresh, you'll never go back to canned". (Skinner walks by) "Nuh—uh—uh, so, anyway, I kicked the guy's ass." (Skinner nods and leaves) "Now, if the berries are too tart..."
He's shown to be failing History and Maths, but is doing quite well in Home Ec.
Nelson: Hey, keep it down, man.
He is utterly enthralled by Andy Williams, and cheers for the performance like a gushing fangirl.
Nelson: Aww, man! I never thought he'd do "Moon River", but then — BAM! Second encore!
Reformed Bully: He becomes this in later seasons, going from Bart's Arch-Nemesis to one of his friends.
Sixth Ranger: Often appears as a fourth member of Jimbo's Gang of Bullies.
Smarter Than You Look: Despite his brutish appearance, it's implied in a few episodes that Nelson is actually quite intelligent.
Stop Hitting Yourself: King of this trope. As well as playing it straight, he once told a butler to stop buttling himself and got an owl in a headlock and told it to stop endangering itself.
Stout Strength: Nelson is frequently regarded by the other kids as a tough fighter and he was the reigning bully of Springfield Elementary.
Took a Level in Kindness: In his first appearance, he was downright monstrous and cruel, providing Bart with some in-universe Nightmare Fuel. But over the years, he generally just beats up other kids to keep up appearances rather than out of any actual malice.
Toxic Friend Influence: Marge sees him as this to Bart. Oftentimes he pushes Bart into misbehaving worse than usual (and then taunting him when he feels bad or gets in trouble).
Troubling Unchildlike Behavior: He smokes and has been known to drink, too.
Tuckerization: The creators state he was named after Judd Nelson.
Vocal Evolution: His voice became increasingly gruff after series 7. This is contrasted with his famous laugh, which is retained via stock usage from his early appearances and is thus much higher-pitched.
With Friends Like These...: Nelson often only treats his friends slightly better than his bullying victims. He's not above threatening or outright beating up Bart, Jimbo, or the Weasels when they get on his nerves.
Wouldn't Harm the Disabled: When he finds out that Kevin from a parallel class is blind, he not only becomes nice to him but also begins to fiercely protect him.
Wouldn't Hit a Girl: This is one of Nelson's traits, as explained in Bye, Bye, Nerdie. He does help Lisa in order to understand why bullies like him pick on nerds. That said he will bully girls though other means, such as Sherri and Terri and even Luann Van Houten once.