Beleaguered Assistant: Dan is frequently overwhelmed by Selina's demands.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Amy. The two of them dated for a week sometime before the series began and normally can't stomach one another, but they do occasionally seem to care about one another a bit more than most colleagues do. In Season 6, they have drunken sex offscreen, which results in Amy getting pregnant. Amy tries to nudge Dan into settling down with her and raising their child together, but when Dan remains oblivious to her advances, she decides to get an abortion.
Blunt "Yes"
Gary: Every single thing you say to me is emasculating. Do you realize that?
Dan: Yes.
The Charmer: Subverted. Whenever he turns on the charm, his colleagues find it anything but.
Mike: You know, Dan, watching you try to be nice is like watching a baby smoke a cigarette. It's kind of cool, but also very disturbing.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: He will sell out whoever he works for if he thinks it can further his career, but then this is par for the course in politics. He's just the one in Selina's staff who displays it the most.
Determinator: He faces some of the most brutal setbacks in the series, yet still manages to stage a remarkable comeback against all odds
Averted in the finale after Jonah gets one in on him, causing him to quit politics for good
Deadpan Snarker: Like most of the cast, Dan is frequently sarcastic.
Didn't Think This Through: No matter how skilled you are, sneaking in a bill opposed by the President and much of Congress will cause a shitstorm. And result in the Veep having to veto the bill she spent ages working on. He is still dealing with the fallout as of the Season 1 finale, and possibly into Season 2.
Even Evil Has Standards: He's genuinely disgusted and outraged when he sees Jonah get grabbed in the balls by Teddy and tells him not to put up with it because it's sexual harassment.
Future Loser: The Grand Finale shows that 24 years later he's remained as skeezy as ever, except instead of being a member of working in politics, he's selling SoCal real estate. Being who he is, though, he's more than satisfied with flaunting the money he's made off of it, and doesn't seem to really care that he never accomplished anything outside of being rich.
Girl-on-Girl is Hot: Offers to Catherine to have a threesome with her, himself, and Marjorie when the lesbian couple are trying for a baby.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Averted. Though clearly thinking himself as a cut above the rest, Dan's arrogance and inability to think things through causes his advice to not only be useless not once or twice, but every single time, frequently backfiring into his and/or Selina's face.
In Season 2, he is told several times directly to his face that he is not nearly as smart as he thinks he is. Once by Kent, once by oil lobbyist Sidney Purcell, and once by Selina herself, as seen in "Hostages", where Dan's attempts to sidle up to her backfire, as the VP was in the middle of reacting to the news of a marine losing his leg. He's put in his place so severely that even Gary gloats to him about it.
Gary: End of an era.
In Season 3, when Selina is running for President, she promotes Dan to campaign manager. However, he ends up being unable to deal with the pressure and has a nervous breakdown. As a result, Selina replaces him with Amy.
Also in Season 3, he leaks a (presumably false) story about Governor Chung being involved in the torture of Iraqi prisoners to Jonah in order to get his trashy news site discredited and shut down. This comes back to bite Dan in the ass when Kent threatens to fire him because the leak has been traced back to him. Of course, Dan resolves this quickly enough by getting Jonah to denounce the internet as his source for the story in exchange for a job with Selina.
In Season 4, he reveals that he's been setting up Jonah to take the fall for the Medileaks scandal by slowly increasing his role in the administration. This, again, bites him in the ass when the scandal escalates further and a bigger scapegoat is required, resulting in Ben and Kent forcing him to resign in disgrace instead.
In Season 7 he tries to be this to Richard as Richard keeps near-inexplicably moving up the ranks of party politics, clearly hoping he can be The Man Behind the Man to Richard's Puppet King as his Chief of Staff. Except Richard's rise has pretty much nothing to do with anything Dan does, the few things he does try doing inevitably backfire on him, and when Selina eventually promotes Richard to her cabinet, it is on the express condition that he fire Dan.
Ignored Epiphany: After his attempt to seduce Felix Wade fails because, at age 39, he's too old for Felix's tastes, Dan tells Amy, who is pregnant with his child, that he's considering re-evaluating his life style of meaningless sex with women who are half his age. When Amy goes to talk to him later about possibly getting back together, she walks in on him about to have sex with another woman like he never had his epiphany.
It's All About Me: It's pretty clear that Dan's sole concern is himself and his own career.
Karma Houdini: Ultimately, he's this by the Grand Finale. Though he's been fired by Selina, he ends up becoming a successful real estate agent and gets married to a woman some thirty years younger than him. His jerkassery is never punished and he's the most happiest out of the entire cast (except for maybe Kent, who seems to have gotten a little eccentric in his old age but is otherwise happily retired, and obviously except for Richard). That said, it's made clear that his political career never went anywhere and that, contrary to his lofty ambitions throughout the series, he ended up remaining a posturing nobody, flaunting what little status being the most successful real estate agent in the middle of nowhere can get him.
Laser-Guided Karma: Dan gets hit with this repeatedly.
In order to damage control the Medileaks scandal, Dan offers the idea of firing an employee as a scapegoat, first an intern and later aiming to target Jonah. The Meyers Administration decides to pin it on Dan instead and he gets fired.
Upon being fired, Dan manages to land a job at Sidney Purcell's lobbying firm, only to be fired when it becomes apparent that his prior backstabbing and manipulations have alienated him from everyone in power and thus left him with no connections with which to draw in clients.
While working for CBS, Dan gets his senior news anchor fired her out of revenge for her creating rumors of them having behind the scenes affairs. He ends up having poor on-air chemistry with his new partner and ends up getting sacked.
After getting fired by Selina for a second time, Dan's final bid to further his political career is to ride Richard Splett's coattails as his new Chief of Staff. Dan is clearly hoping that he can make Richard a Puppet King with him as the brains behind the operation. Unfortunately for Dan, Richard continues to move up the ladder without his influence and when Jonah convinces the now President Selina to add Richard to her cabinet, it's on the basis that Dan would get sacked again.
Law of Inverse Fertility: He has drunken sex with Amy and ends up getting her pregnant in Season 6, despite having been told that his sperm had slow motility and neither of them are interested in having children or having families, much less commit themselves to each other.
Likes Older Women: In a private conversation, he says that he prefers older women due to their life experience — of course, at the time, he's flirting with Selina. Almost leads to a Mrs. Robinson moment between him and Selina, until it's ruined when he tells her his darkest secret: he killed a stray dog on a dare. Subverted in Season 6, where he is outraged at the notion that he would hit on an older woman for any reason other than personal advancement.
Manipulative Bastard: A highly skilled political jockey who can quickly defuse complex problems for Selina, while also making things better for himself. Or so he thinks.
May–December Romance: In the Grand Finale, his wife is revealed to have been born in 2019.
Metaphorgotten:
Dan: [to Amy] The best way to get revenge on people is to make a shitload of money off of them! That's what Mark Twain said.
Oh, Crap!:
Amy: Remember a couple months ago after you got fired and we had drinks with Ben?
Dan: Yeah, yeah, yeah, we had a lot of drinks.
Amy: Yeah, well, I'm pregnant. And it's yours. [walks away]
Dan: (Beat) ...Fuck! I really thought things were starting to turn around.
Older Than They Look: 24 years later in the Distant Finale, he hasn't aged a day. The only major difference is a beard and a tan.
Rewarded as a Traitor Deserves: His willingness to sell out his team or spill secrets to pander to prospective employers makes him an undesirable hire.
Slasher Smile: It comes out when he's particularly on edge, either in victory or defeat.
Small Name, Big Ego: Dan thinks of himself as a House of Cards (US) style schemer. In reality, he's no more competent than the rest of the cast and simply mistakes backstabbing for political prowess.
Smug Snake: The guy thinks of himself as a political badass and likes to rub it in people's faces.
The Sociopath: The show is giving less-subtle hints that he seems to be of the high-functioning variety. The fact that he revealed that he killed a stray dog as a child to win a dare is leaving little room for doubt.
Sleeping Their Way to the Top: He attempts it by sleeping with Amy's sister, because he thinks she can get a job for him at CBS (she actually works for CVS, a pharmacy chain).
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Gives a devastating one to Jonah.
You Have Outlived Your Usefulness: A rare inversion - Dan sells out his boss, Senator Hallows, to dig Selina out of a scandal. In the process he gets a job on the Veep's staff. It's clear from earlier dialogue he sees the Senator as merely a stepping stone on his career.}
Workaholic: Dan doesn't seem to have a personal life at all. He mentions dating a woman in "Nicknames", but only to further his political career. When he finds out that she won't get an important job, he dumps her immediately. (He sleeps with numerous other women, but never has any meanignful relationships).
Working with the Ex: Amy does not have a high opinion of him. Well, not his competence, but his personality.
Wrong Genre Savvy: As shown above, he thinks he's far smarter than everyone and fantastic at his job, not grasping he's as much an incompetent nut as the rest of the staff, and thinking he's a key figure in a serious political drama rather than a comedy where humor comes from his idiocy.