Brick Joke: His obsession with getting laid by Eights.
Brother–Sister Incest: Marries his former step-sister during his presidential campaign. Amazingly, the media learning of this relationship actually increases his poll numbers, even after their parents get back together. It later turns out that her father is Jonah's biological father, making them actual half-siblings.
Butt-Monkey: He is hated by pretty much everyone in the Vice President's office. And the Administration. And the District. And possibly in the world.
Cannot Tell a Joke: He's so inept at talking about anything that telling funny jokes is out of his league.
Casanova Wannabe: Facially, he isn't as much of a manter as most examples but he hits on Amy, Sue, and pretty much every remotely attractive girl he comes into contact with. Always rebuffed due to his boorishness and rude personality.
Comically Missing the Point: He can't read the room on a frequent basis.
He does this several times when dealing with the subject matter of Teddy grabbing his balls.
He makes the Wrong Assumption about what Kent and Eric (and Sue) were calling him about in regards to "what happened in the Vice President [Doyle]'s office" and reluctantly admits that Teddy molested him... which wasn't what they were asking about (and it's interesting news to them, but they don't do anything about it). Later, he tries to talk to Catherine about it (probably to tell her that he isn't a loser that got molested) since she had walked in on the call, but she has no idea what he's talking about since she came in after he confessed.
He walks out on a class action lawsuit against Teddy because he found out all of the other victims were women, which he thinks means he's a wimp.
In a deleted scene, he forgets that he and Dan agreed to Un-person Ed earlier that episode, leading to Dan trying to refer back to it in a joke by asking "Who?" whenever Jonah brings him up. When Dan reminds him, Jonah laughs much more than what was needed.
He frequently makes unintentionally misogynistic remarks and still has no idea why women feel uncomfortable around him.
Daddy Issues: His biological dad is not in the picture and he hates his stepdad, Lloyd, for being strict on him and giving him bad grades in math class. Even worse when it turns out that his stepdad is his biological dad.
Does This Remind You of Anything?: His presidential run in Season 7 is an unsubtle rip towards Donald Trump's controversial presidency (or is a reference to criticisms of his presidency) at the time. For example, Jonah makes Islamophobic remarks that gain him popularity amongst Islamophobes, white supremacists, and racists, as well as demanding Selina show her birth certificate to prove her real age (referencing accusations that Barack Obama is not American-born and that he should prove his heritage by showing his birth certificate).
Double Standard: Rape, Male on Male: Averted. In season 4, he gets a new boss, Teddy, who frequently fondles his balls as a power move in the office. It's never Played for Laughs, and when Dan witnesses it, he's genuinely outraged.
It gets even more averted when Jonah seems genuinely scarred by the experience for several episodes afterwards, and asked to testify in a class action lawsuit against Teddy in 4x06.
The Dog Bites Back:
In Season 5, Jonah gets sick of Selina bossing him around and decides to campaign on an anti-Meyer platform. It works wonders for his polling, which suits Selina just fine.
In Season 7, Jonah hires Teddy, who used to sexually harass him, just so he can make fun of Teddy for being chemically castrated as punishment for his sexual harassment.
Drunk On Power: As Jonah moves up the political ladder, he becomes more and more unhinged and vile.
Dumbass Has a Point:
Kent tells him to get his "cerise"-colored binder and gets mad at him when he brings three red-colored binders including the cerise-colored binder and a cherry-red binder. To anyone else, cerise and cherry-red look like the exact shade of red.
Both "Daylight Saving Time" and "Daylight Savings Time" are valid ways of calling the term.
He hates Daylight Savings Time for being inconveniencing, which is more of a popular and reasonable sentiment than the rest of the smarter cast may think.
Establishing Character Moment: To set up just how much of a hapless loser Jonah is, the first person to really lay into him is Mike, of all people, the character in which numerous jabs had already been made at remarking his incompetence.
Everyone Has Standards:
He runs for President on an anti-Immigrant platform but still finds the violent rhetoric of some followers, who want to outright murder illegals, to be extreme and later admits to going too far.
While campaigning for Congress by working the counter at a bowling alley he has a legitimately friendly and positive banter with the employee supervising him, who is a woman with Down's syndrome. When his opponent releases a video of him shouting at Teddy but framed so it looks like he was shouting at the woman his first response isn't how bad it would be for the campaign but hoping the woman personally wouldn't believe it.
He has some views that are decidedly non-PC and is not incredibly bright or competent, but when he finds that he has accidentally ended up at a neo-Nazi rave while on a Congressional junket to Georgia, he immediately realises he's in too deep and gets the hell out of dodge.
Fox News Liberal: By Season 7, Jonah has essentially become a far-right conspiracy theorist, yet is still running for an ostensibly Democratic nomination. He even becomes one of the frontrunners during the Grand Finale specifically because of Islamophobic statements he has made.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He's frequently the most inept member of the group and the rest of the staff find him annoying to be around, even when he's trying to be nice. Although he's had a few moments where he does genuinely get along with Dan.
Jonah: Good morning!
Ben: Ugh, how do you make two perfectly good words sound so irritating?
From Nobody to Nightmare: He goes from a three-month internship to a White House Liaison somehow drunk with power...and things get worse and worse from there until he gets elected to Congress, shuts down the government out of spite, and sets himself up for a presidential run at the end of Season 6. Fortunately, he only has scores about 3% in the polls... but then Selina makes him her VP. Though she eventually has him impeached.
Fun with Acronyms: Does this incessantly. Not only does he call the President POTUS ("Poh-tuss"), but he also calls the Veep VPOTUS ("Vee-poh-tuss"), the First Dog of the United States FDOTUS ("F-doh-tus"), and makes them up pretty much on the fly, such as VPVP ("Vice Presidential Visual Presence"). This annoys everybody.
Mike: You can't just make up acronyms, Jonah.
Jonah: Somebody has to, Mike.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Because of how much of a petty, abrasive and moody manchild Jonah is, he tends to constantly act out in fits of rage when he feels offended
Happily Married: He and Beth are still together in 2045 and quite happily so.
Hated by All: With the exception of Richard and his mother, he is disliked by everybody he encounters, even foreign politicans. A focus group unanimously disliked him after only seeing him in a campaign ad.
Focus group member: He's the wrong shape.
Humiliation Conga: In "Some New Beginnings" he gets outed as being behind the "WestWingMan" blog, fired from his White House job, and nearly dragged out of the building by security guards.
Ignored Epiphany:
After being repeatedly sexually harassed, Jonah finally realizes that sexual harassment is a terrible thing. Unfortunately, Jonah only cares about sexual harassment perpetrated against men and remains as misogynistic as ever.
After trying to get rid of Daylight Savings Time in Season 6, in Season 7, he promises to his supporters that he'll ban math because it was invented by the Algerians, who are Muslims, and everyone hates Muslims. And once again, it's also because of a grudge (he hates DST because it made him late for an appointment, he hates math because his math teacher, his stepdad, kept giving him bad grades).
Insult Backfire: While accusing Montez of discriminating against him for being "almost Jewish".
Montez: Why don't you go take it up with the Anti-Defamation League?
Jonah: The fuck is that?
Montez: Wow, okay. My offer is not gonna be on the table for long, good afternoon, gentlemen.
Jerkass: Jonah is a selfish, arrogant and narcissistic asshole, who is also incredibly annoying, smug and immature during social interactions. Pretty much everyone who knows him holds him in contempt. It is his lack of self-awareness that really stops him from being The Scrappy.
Mike: I'm appealing to your better nature.
Jonah: Mike, I don't have one of those.
Kicked Upstairs: In Season 5, he's recruited to run for an open seat in the House of Representatives by the Meyer administration and his uncle Jeff Kane, a prominent New Hampshire political figure who actually wants the seat to go to his son Ezra, who is deployed in Afghanistan. Jonah is described as being so ineffectual that he'll be easy to replace when Ezra comes home, but as Jonah himself points out, he's very, very good at hanging onto positions he's never really deserved. In the finale, Selina makes him veep to get his delegates, while making sure that he has no authority.
Jonah: I went to the White House on a three-month placement and stayed for four years! I'm a MRSA infection! You don't get rid of Jonah Ryan!
Large and in Charge: Inverted. He's easily the tallest character on the show (a fact others mock him about regularly) but he's generally always the least powerful and authoritative person, however much he'd like to think otherwise.
Laser-Guided Karma:
His anti-vax crusade leads to the death of his own father.
He is made Vice President, a position that Selina guarantees he will have no power in. In the future it is revealed he was impeached and has lost his other testicle to cancer.
Memetic Molester: In-universe, he is described as having the face of a rapist. When Doyle hears that sexual harassment occurred in his office, he immediately thinks it was Jonah (actually he was the victim).
Jonah: May I remind you this rapist face gets eights? Consensually, I might add.
Meaningful Name: Whether or not this was intentional... his name is Jonah and he's supremely unlucky.
Momma's Boy: He frequently calls his mom.
Nepotism: Sort of. As we learn in Season 3, he only got a job in the White House because his uncle has important political connections in New Hampshire. Jonah, however, refuses to acknowledge this.
Jonah: Mom, do you think that you could talk to Uncle Jeff for me? I want a job on my own merits and I think he's the guy to get it for me.
Noodle Incident: He's been banned from Uber because he has a low rating. It's not hard to imagine why.
Obfuscating Disability: In Season 6, he hides the fact that his cancer is in remission and shaves his head because being a cancer patient is good for his approval ratings.
Once an Episode: He will point out he works at the White House. And hit on Amy. And Sue. And everyone. See the character quote.
Patricide: His anti-vax crusade leads to his father's death.
Pet the Dog: For all his flaws, he does seem to genuinely appreciate Richard and makes a point of getting him a position in Selina's cabinet, which sets the stage for Richard's own eventual ascension to the Presidency.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech:
Dan tears into him when he finds out Jonah's position is so unimportant he cannot be used for information.
Jonah gives an epic denouncement against Teddy in Season 5, calling people like him (i.e. sexual harassers) soulless. Unfortunately for Jonah, Bill Ericsson's creative camera work makes it look like Jonah's rant was directed at a woman with Down Syndrome.
Running Gag:
Hey, did you know he works at the White House? This ends in season 3, since he no longer works there.
Him doing something misogynistic and causing women around him to perform the Girl Code for each other.
Small Name, Big Ego: Vastly overstates the importance of his position, and is severely lacking in self-awareness. This gets even worse in season 3 when he's fired, and insists that the pathetic trashy gossip blog he's set up is making him an Intrepid Reporter who's going to bring Washington to its knees.
Smug Snake: On the rare occasions he gets one over on fellow Smug Snake Dan, he will make sure to rub it in, especially when Dan suffers an anxiety attack and is hospitalised as a result.
Spanner in the Works: Jonah throws Furlong and Montez's plans into chaos when he has his "Jeffersons" caucus vote against the bipartisan budget bill, for no reason beyond spiting Furlong and the rest of Congress for not taking him seriously.
Suspiciously Specific Denial: While Montez's assistant introduces her to Jonah in a meeting, Jonah says that they don't need guards because because "it's not like [he's] gonna rape [Montez]". Montez takes it as this trope and Jonah says that it literally means that he wouldn't rape Montez.
Undying Loyalty: To his Only Friend, Richard. Despite their Odd Friendship, Jonah does value him. He eventually ensures that Richard is given a cabinet position, which helps pave the way for Richard becoming President.
Would Hurt a Child: While riding with Richard, Jonah gets mad at him for not driving faster (because he's holding a camera at the same time) and Richard ends up crashing into a stop sign. Richard is at least relieved that he didn't hit the schoolchildren about to cross the street, but Jonah doesn't give a damn about them.