Beleaguered Assistant: He's constantly demeaned at by Selena.
Big Eater: Mike is usually seen stuffing his face whenever there is food around.
Jonah: Okay, Mike. One day, you're going to wake up and find that your lungs have turned into pastry.
In season 4, he tries to eat more healthy at the insistence of his wife.
Dan: Mike trying to be healthy. It's like a potato trying to whistle.
Brick Joke: His Bullshitzu.
Deadpan Snarker: He has a sarcastic sense of humour for many of the situations the team lands themselves in.
Flanderization: In early seasons, Mike shows some signs of incompetence, but is also generally capable of doing his job and defusing the frequent threats to it posed by the various political storms Selena gets into. By the latter seasons, he can barely function as an independent adult, never mind as a Washington speechwriter.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Mike isn't outright despised like Jonah, but his ever-escalating incompetence and boorish behavior means the rest of the cast disregard him as a loser.
Happily Married: To Wendy.
Hidden Depths: Mike screws up at his job countless times, but seems to be genuinely good at schmoozing and making the administration more likable to the press.
Hoist by His Own Petard: He gets Selina to cry in an interview with the hope of making her look sympathetic. The Genre Savvy Journalist figures this out quickly.
I Take Offense to That Last One: When listing the bad things that could possibly happen and overshadow the plastic untensil incident, he hypothetically suggests that Tom Hanks might die. Everyone is horrified by this.
In another example, after Selina tears into him for incompetence, he only attempts to rebuff the last part:
Selina: Remind me never to get trapped in a burning building with you, Mike.
Mike: I'm very good in a fire.
I'll Pretend I Didn't Hear That: Mike always tries to ignore it when the Veeple People learn about something scandalous.
Mike: (cringing) Christ, I hate knowledge.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Mike accidentally emails everyone in the West Wing the contents of Kent's flash drive, which contained polling questions like "what if POTUS lied to the American people?" and thus alerts everyone about the spy cover-up.
Ninja Pirate Zombie Robot: Described by Anthony, one of the owners of frozen yoghurt shop as a "gay Irish fireman."
Running Gag: In season 2, the boat he's trying to get rid of.
Super Gullible: In "Mother," he can be seen falling for a blatantly obvious pyramid scheme set up by Selina's ex-husband Andrew.
Ultimate Job Security:
Mike is in charge of Selina's PR, so his incompetence turns a great many of her mistakes into fullblown scandals. However, Selina keeps him on despite his incompetence. Subverted in Season 5, where Selina decides to find a new Press Secretary to replace Mike, but she loses her bid for re-election before anything comes of it.
Finally comes to an end in season 6, as Mike is not included in Selina's team during her new campaign for president.
Wounded Gazelle Gambit: A variant. He gets Selina to cry on camera with the hope of playing up her sympathetic traits. Backfires: see Hoist by His Own Petard.