Adult Sleeps with Stuffed Toy: Huggsy, his beloved "bedtime penguin pal". In season ten he indicates that he may have stolen Huggsy from an actual child, and refuses to give it to baby Emma even though she loves it.
Alone Among the Couples: He ends up as this in the last episode. But he gets a Love Interest in the Joey spinoff.
Always Someone Better: To Chandler a few times. His prowess in attracting women is pretty much indisputable by any characters, which has lead to some insecurity on Chandler's part when he's compared with him (not helped by Joey's overall pride and occasional insensitivity towards Chandler on the topic).
Ambiguously Bi: He's The Casanova but the flashback episode "The One with Joey's Interview" has a whole montage of suggestive moments with Chandler and Ross.
Bad "Bad Acting": Most of his in-series acting is either this or overacting.
Bad Liar: One of the subplots of "The One with Rachel's Other Sister" is about him being a terrible liar and Phoebe teaching him how to lie.
Berserk Button:
He really does not like to share his food. When Ross steals his muffin, Joey reminds him of that quite loudly.
Do not lie to Joey, especially if you are his best friend. It happens quite a few times with Chandler.
Better as Friends: With Rachel.
Beware the Silly Ones: He has a long fuse and is generally a goofy and amiable dude, but awaken his deeply-buried wrath and everyone, even his close friends, have good reason to be afraid of him.
Big Brother Instinct: He's very protective of his seven sisters. When the youngest, Dina, got pregnant by her idiot boyfriend, Joey attacked said boyfriend, dragged him to Dina, and tried to officiate a Shotgun Wedding. He also acts like this towards all his friends, particularly the three girls. He even allows his sisters to beat the crap out of Chandler when he drunkenly makes out with one sister and can't remember which one it wasnote 
Big Eater: In one episode, he volunteers to eat a whole Thanksgiving turkey, which doesn't mean he'll stop eating until then. (He calls it "warming up.") He eventually does eat the entire turkey, and still has room for dessert. Another episode involving Phoebe's birthday dinner at a nice restaurant. Over the course of the episode, everyone, including Phoebe, leaves for other activities... except Joey. He's bummed at first, but lights up when all of the already ordered entrees arrive. He is also the only one who enjoyed Rachel's trifle that contained beef, also managing to eat the pieces everyone else claimed to have eaten. In an Imagine Spot of what if he'd married Monica, he became morbidly obese from overeating her constant good cooking.
Joey: 'Cause I'm a Tribbiani! And this is what we do! I mean we may not be great thinkers or world leaders, we don't read a lot or run very fast, but damn it, we can eat!
Book Dumb: He lacks academic knowledge, but is street smart, at least in early seasons before devolving into The Ditz.
Brainless Beauty: A sympathetic one. Even Rachel tells him "Thank God you’re pretty" in one episode.
Brilliant, but Lazy:
For all the criticism of his acting ability, he is actually quite gifted at memorization. He is consistently able to memorize lines in a short amount of time no matter the subject matter (although he'd naturally need help with pronunciation for the more complex words). However, he's consistently Book Dumb because he cares so little about academic pursuits and would rather do something fun. On those rare occasions where does he try to apply himself (such as reading an encyclopedia in "The One with the 'Cuffs" or preparing for a trip to the Met with Charlie in "The One with the Fertility Test"), he had no trouble retaining the information and engaging in conversation on the given topics. note 
"The One with the Cooking Class" suggests he has enough raw talent to rival Monica as a Supreme Chef, if he actually went all in instead of just making the occasional meal for himself and his friends.
Joey has also shown that his acting skills actually go a long way in mundane settings. Whenever he's helped out the other friends in their professions, he adopts a "character" to help him with the job. This typically ends up with Joey becoming more popular and well liked with the rest of the staff, and shows that Joey has real skills when he puts the effort into it.
Brutal Honesty: Goes between this and Innocently Insensitive. It's Played for Laughs usually, but he tends to be very blunt about Chandler's romantic prospects throughout the series and his overall superiority towards Chandler in terms of winning over women or making love.
Butt-Monkey: He’s definitely luckier than Chandler and Ross, but his friends sometimes make fun of him for his embarrassing acting gigs (Al Pacino's butt, the VD poster) and he's often the butt of the jokes for his stupidity, his failures, and other situations.
I Call Him "Mister Happy": The Little General - formerly Little Major, but it earned a promotion after Denise DeMarco.
I Can't Dance: His resume claims he has years of dance experience and even trained with Twyla Tharp. In reality, he's a terrible dancer whose "moves" are limited to swinging his arms around and bobbing his head.
The Casanova: He's successful with women, and is seen dating and sleeping with many different girls in various episodes. In fact, women are his biggest obsession along with food. note 
Catchphrase: "How you doin'?"
Characterization Marches On:
In the original series, there's a running joke about him being a terrible actor who constantly has to lie on his resume (Phoebe once told him that one of the casting directors said they had never heard a more fake Italian accent from someone of Italian origins). In the spinoff, Joey is seen as a much more competent actor.
In the pilot, he was a bit of a Jerkass and more of a Handsome Lech. Beginning in the second episode, he's the lovable goof we all know and love.
He didn't have as much of a childlike naïvete in early seasons that he was later known for, to the point that it ends up contradicting some of his behavior in later seasons. For example, he doesn't initially believe in Santa Claus in early seasons up to at least season 5, but by season 9 is upset at missing out at meeting Santa at the Thanksgiving Day parade. Similarly, he's one of the first to know that the "pet got sent to a farm" story is a lie and gives Ross a look of pity when it's revealed he once fell for it; by the series finale, he believes the exact same farm story to cover up the deaths of the chick and the duck.
Chick Magnet: Due to being a ladies man. All his female friends (Rachel, Phoebe, Monica) were attracted to him at different points.
Chivalrous Pervert: Joey is this when it comes to his female friends. He hits on them on numerous occasions and tries several ploys to either see them naked or see them kiss each other, but he's kind, fiercely loyal and incredibly respectful towards them. When everyone believes Phoebe's been in a porno movie, Joey is the only member of the gang who refuses to watch it. He also freaks out quite a bit when Rachel calls his bluff and actually offers to sleep with him. Upon hearing Phoebe was pregnant, he goes out to beat up the supposed father... then comes back and proposes to Phoebe so she won't be alone. Later, when he finds out that Rachel is the one who is actually pregnant, he promptly proposes to her too. In one episode, when a drunken Rachel responds favorably to his "How you doin'?" line, he tells Ross not to let her drink any more.
The Ditz: Especially in later seasons. Joey's ditziness especially shines through in the subject of geography - at various points in the series he has thought that the Netherlands was where Peter Pan lives, described Chandler's "going to Yemen" ruse for getting rid of Janice as clever because "it almost sounds like a real place", and gone to the bank to try changing dollars into "Vermont money".
Dumbass Has a Point:
In one episode, he pointed out, when everyone (except Phoebe, who was usually self-employed) wondered why their bosses hated them, that they were in a coffee shop at 11:30 a.m on a Wednesday.
While he does screw up things for his friends, it's noted that his friends often lied or mislead him first.
Dumb Muscle: Something of an Informed Attribute, but in-universe he's considered the strongest of the three guys, as mentioned a few times by other characters.
Ethical Slut: Rare Male Example. He goes through women like most people breathe oxygen, but always respects their boundaries and never comes off as predatory. If anything, he's probably the nicest to potential Love Interests out of any of the three guys.
Everyone Has Standards: He may sleep around a lot, but Joey draws the line at being considered a creepy sex addict, as well as other things, a la Dennis Reynolds from It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia.
For example, he draws the line at having sex with someone who is drunk, and when Ross reveals he had a sex tape of him and Rachel he points out it would've been okay had she consented to it note .
In particular, he's horrified when he discovers that Monica and Chandler are having sex while Emma is in her crib just one room over.
Joey: You can't have s-e-x when you're taking care of a b-a-b-i-e!
While he has two-timed before, he draws the line on doing so with one's wife, and is upset to learn that his dad has a mistress.
While he was never in this exact situation himself, when Chandler was dating a woman going through a divorce who had a chance to patch things up with her husband, Joey observed that in Chandler's position, he would step back and give the woman a chance to make her marriage work, particularly when the couple had a child to consider.
Based on how protective he is of women when they're pregnant, and his offer to marry Rachel when she was carrying Emma, it's heavily implied Joey believes that a man should be there to help their pregnant wife and be there to raise the child once they're born.
When the gang find out that "Phoebe Buffay" is starring in porn Joey is the only member of the gang who refuses to watch it, and he tries to get Gunther to ban a guy from Central Perk for talking about the movies. Then again, when the gang work out it's actually Ursula in the movies (using "Phoebe" as her Porn Name) he immediately changes his mind and joins in watching.
Extreme Omnivore: Rachel's little incident of It Tastes Like Feet mentioned above? Yeah, didn't bother him in the slightest. He actually ate everyone else's slices.
Joey: What's not to like. Custard? Good. Jam? Good. Meat? Good.
In another episode, he mentions that Chandler and Ross once bet him $50 to eat a book. Monica uses this as proof of how truly bad the food at Alessandro's was.
Monica: I have five friends who couldn't eat it, and one of them eats books.
He's the only member of the gang besides Phoebe who voluntarily tasted Carol's expressed breast milk
Eye Take: A character trademark. Whenever Joey comes to major realization, the camera holds on him as the information takes a moment to sink in before he goes bug eyed and dramatically reacts.
Flanderization:
His eating habits and lack of intelligence, particularly his Manchild behavior. For instance, early in the show, he knows what an Adam's apple is. Later in the series, Chandler has to tell him it's not a "Joey's apple" as it's not named after every individual.
His spin off added to this. He got no dumber but rather his womanizing habits got the attention. On Friends he was very successful with women but within reason. On Joey he seems to have multiple sexual partners every day. It got to the point that, in later seasons, LeBlanc asked the writers to tone it down and give him different jokes.
Foil: To both Chandler and Ross, especially in terms of success with women. He's consistently portrayed as more dimwitted than either of them, but ultimately a nicer friend with more consistent success with women.
Foreign Cuss Word: His knowledge of Italian is pretty patchy, and according to Chandler the only words Joey really knows are curses.
Giftedly Bad: With his acting skills. Often, he'll try to go full on Large Ham where it's not necessary. In his defence, some of the roles he gets are in some real stinkers, such as a Sigmund Freud musical, a ridiculous daytime soap opera, and a porn flick (where he didn't have sex on camera).
Girl-on-Girl is Hot: He definetely thinks so. Heck, his first response to Ross telling the gang his wife was a lesbian was a "Cool!", followed by a lecherous smirk.
Going Commando: A mild running gag. In one episode, Chandler needed to borrow some underwear, to which Joey said "Sorry, I'm not wearing any".
Gratuitous Italian: Kind of. Chandler says Joey "only knows the bad words" of Italian.
Handsome Lech: His treatment of potential female roommates borders on stalking. He views the single women of New York as sexual conquests and not much else (he's never abusive, he's just... very, very shallow). According to LeBlanc on a Gaby Roslin interview, he wasn't a great fan of the more lecherous moments, as he felt like Joey had to be sweeter than that otherwise it'd make no sense why the girls would view him as a friend.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Chandler.
Hidden Depths:
In "The One with the 'Cuffs", he is able to absorb a lot of information on topics beginning with the letter "V" from the one encyclopedia he was able to afford.
In "The One with the Kips", he shows his strange knowledge of elevators.
He also knew how to turn off the radiator in Monica and Rachel's apartment after they broke the handle off. Might not seem like a big deal, but nobody else on hand knew what to do.
He's a fantastic, if careless craftsman, though it's only shown in one episode, "The One with Frank Jr." where he built a giant entertainment center for his and Chandler's apartment and did such a good job of tiling Monica's bathroom that, even with all her super OCD, she called "beautiful". The carelessness comes in when he almost lobotomises Chandler with an electric drill and builds the entertainment center too big for the wall.
In "The One with Russ", it's revealed that he relieves stress by cooking spaghetti sauce.
He almost consistently gives pretty good relationship advice to the rest of the group.
In the extended cut of "TOW all the Jealousy", he takes longer to read Julio's poem than the others but still immediately gets that it's calling Monica shallow and "empty". By contrast, Chandler read it faster but Phoebe had to explain the message to him.
Hilariously Abusive Childhood: One episode reveals that he was sexually abused by his tailor for years as a kid, without even realizing it. It's Played for Laughs.
Home Nudist: When the gang notice someone watching them with a telescope he mentions that he sometimes likes to cook while naked ("nothing that spatters"). He also frequently Sleeps in the Nude and doesn't always remember to get dressed before leaving his room.
Hospital Hottie: He's meant to be this as Dr. Drake Remoray on Days of Our Lives, complete with altered voice, but the exaggerated Soap Within a Show means that his character is way too ridiculous to take seriously. After Joey leaves the show, he pokes fun at this by switching voices mid-sentence whenever he has to say his character's name.
Hypocrite:
He was furious when Chandler kissed his girlfriend, Kathy, even though it's a Running Gag that he ghosts women after spleeping with them. The reason why he sees them as different situations is because Chandler is his Heterosexual Life-Partner; it's the betrayal by a friend that upsets him the most.
He gets outraged when Phoebe's friend Sarah takes french fries of his plate, but eats her dessert with very little qualms while she's taking a phone call.
Hypocritical Humor: He gets annoyed when he realizes one of his one-night stands doesn't remember him even though he never bothers to remember any of them. He justifies this by saying "I am very memorable!" In Joey's defense, it later turned out that he actually slept with the girl's roommate rather than sleeping with this specific girl and forgetting her.
Imaginary Friend: Apparently he had one as a child, a Space Cowboy named "Maurice".
Informed Ability: His acting. When it's shown, he's usually in terrible off-off-off-off-Broadway crap and most of his listed skills are lies (dancing, speaking French, sword-fighting, riding horses...). By the end of the series, though, he's secured a successful career as an actor and even co-starred in an Oscar-worthy film. However, we never get to see the higher quality acting he's supposed to be doing that would have led to that result.
Innocent Innuendo: He can make anything sound dirty, including "Grandma's chicken salad."
Innocently Insensitive: Joey's easily the nicest, most easy-going and most genuinely accepting of the friends, but that doesn't mean he doesn't say and do offensive, insulting or hurtful things... it's just that he's too much of a Ditz and Manchild to really get when his well-meant words or actions can be upsetting. As such, he can be hugely offensive while genuinely thinking he's just being friendly and helpful. On the rare occasions when he understands that he's Hurt someone, he'll feel bad and try to make amends.
Irony: Joey is considered to be the least intelligent of the friends, but he's the one who found clues and figured out Monica and Chandler were in a Secret Relationship, whereas Rachel, Phoebe and Ross caught them in the act.
Italian-American Caricature: He fits some of the stereotypes but not others, you don't really see him in bowling shirts as being an aspiring actor he follows fashion a little more than average. However, he has a huge family (being the only boy with seven sisters whom he is very protective of) who are Catholic (even if he doesn't attend). He is also very fond of both his grandmothers (Nonna and Nonnie) and translates for Nonnie who can't speak English. He's a Big Eater who will eat anything but does have a fondness for Italian food like pizza and lasagne in particular, and at one point realises to his horror he's becoming like his father when he gets upset and angry about wasted pastrami.
Kindhearted Simpleton: Despite his stupidity, he's regularly shown to be a nice and caring friend toward the other five.
Ladykiller in Love: As short-lived as it was, his crush on Rachel in season 8 was genuine. He also develops real feelings for Phoebe's twin Ursula in season 1, his co-star Kate in season 3, his new roommate Janine in season 6 and finally with Alex in the spin-off.
Lethally Stupid: In "The One with Frank Jr.", specifically the scene where he's drilling a hole in the wall and the drill comes out the other side really close to Chandler's head.
Joey: Oh, I'm sorry. Did I get you?
Chandler: No, you didn't get me!! It's an electric drill; you get me, you kill me!!
Like Brother and Sister: With Monica in later seasons, when she marries his Heterosexual Life-Partner Chandler.
Logical Fallacies: Joey naturally falls into this a lot.
Joey: You hid my clothes?! Well... I'm going to do the exact opposite!
Chandler: ...You're going to show me my clothes?
Lost Food Grievance: Do not try to take his food, doing so is his main Berserk Button. He refused to call one girl back after she stole some of his fries on a date and Rachel reveals that he once got mad at Emma, a baby, for trying to take one of his grapes.
Lovable Sex Maniac: He talks openly and often about his many, many sexual conquests, at one point admitting to deflowering an intern on the set of his television show. His love of pornography is also the target of numerous jokes.
Manchild: He constantly mooches off Chandler (with everything from rent payments to acting classes), he refuses to maintain a steady romantic relationship even when he's well into his mid/late-30's, and he's hopelessly idealistic about his acting career despite clearly being a pretty lousy actor. As the show went on, these traits were Flanderized for him, and by the final season he was buying Cabbage Patch Kids dolls, being entertained by a book intended for preschoolers, and had a written letter of his being mistaken as one written by an actual six-year-old.
Massive Numbered Siblings: He is the only boy out of seven sisters.
The McCoy: Of the men. He's The McCoy to Chandler's The Kirk and Ross' The Spock.
Mr. Fanservice: The go-to guy for Shirtless Scenes among the main male characters, and is definitely the most well-built and traditionally attractive of the three. He even gets a few nude scenes over the years, though generally for Naked People Are Funny purposes rather than outright Fanservice. Many women also consider him this In-Universe, and he's even used it leverage a few acting gigs.
Named Possession: Joey names his Barcalounger recliner Rosita.
Never Gets Fat: To the point the "Joey Special" (two large cheese pizzas) is named in his honor. Averted in an Imagine Spot where he married supreme chef Monica, as having a wife who constantly cooked gourmet food for him was finally enough for him to grow extremely fat.
Nice Guy: Joey is incredibly loyal and a great friend. He manages to be a good guy despite his womanizing ways.
The Not-Love Interest: To Phoebe and Chandler. Before Chandler and Monica got together, he and Joey were considered to be "The other couple of the series" by some interviewers.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Joey or Joe. In the latter case, it's usually Chandler being sarcastic. Phoebe does call him by his full name when he blows her off one night. Another instance is when he is sitting at the coffeehouse brainstorming for a new stage surname with Chandler. They always use Joseph, not Joey. He finally likes one of Chandler's suggestions (Stalin), but it fails to impress the crew in his next audition.
Papa Wolf: He can be very protective of his friends. In "The One with the Red Sweater", Phoebe tells him that she's pregnant (when actually Rachel was), and that the father wants nothing to do with her or the baby.
Joey: Well who is this guy?! Huh? Who is he? 'Cause I will track him down and kick his ass!
Phoebe: David Lynn.
Joey: David Lynn! David Lynn! David Lynn!! [exits]
He's rather protective of his friends' children, too. In "The One with the Blind Dates" while Monica and Chandler are having sex with Emma in the next room (with the front door unlocked to leave Emma open for a kidnapping no less), Joey's immediate gut reaction upon realizing that is to take Emma out of the apartment into his own, deeming such irresponsibility unacceptable.
Parental Substitute: To Phoebe during her wedding day, filling the role of Phoebe's father, after Phoebe tells him that her stepdad can't come to the ceremony. He takes the role very seriously.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Phoebe. They playfully flirt, they have a softness for each other (often both of them picking the other over the rest of the group), they have a lot of Ship Tease, including at least four kisses, yet they never dated (or had sex) in all ten years, and aside from their jokes about being a possible couple in the future, it was clear that they just wanted to be friends, but nothing more. They even keep a pact until Phoebe's wedding to Mike to get married if they are both still single when they're forty
The Pornomancer: Possibly the most famous modern pornomancer. Despite not having any magical skills (or intelligence) of note, he rarely needs to utter more than "Hey. How you doin'?" before scoring.
Pride:
He is very proud of his past role as Dr. Drake Ramoray and after that, sometimes believes to be too good for being treated as a normal actor, he has already lost a job out of denying to have a small role, he refused to believe a very shady movie wasn't his big break, and in "TOW Rachel's Assistant" he refuses to audition to come back to 'Days of Our Lives', believing he should have the part automatically (to be fair to Joey, he was auditioning for the part of Drake Ramoray's twin brother, so he was uniquely qualified for the position). It's particularly noteworthy that he considers himself a better actor for that gig, despite the fact he only earned it by sleeping with the cast director.
He feels this ways about his performance in bed, asserting that women should remember him even when he doesn't.
Reading the Stage Directions Out Loud: In some of his acting gigs, one is even the page quote. And the very first episode of Joey has him introducing himself with "I am [name]!"
Really Gets Around: Big time. Best demonstrated when Chandler wants to ask advice for a sexual problem, and rhetorically asks, "Joey... you've had a lot of sex, right?" Joey replies, "Today? Some... not a lot."
Real Men Wear Pink: He's the most confident, macho, and "manly" of the three male characters, but he has no problem being In Touch with His Feminine Side in quite a few episodes. Being Janine's roommate in season 6 makes him develop an interest in girly activities, such as knitting and flower arranging. In another episode, he really likes wearing a bag, even if the others make fun of him because it looks like a woman's purse.
Romantic False Lead: He's used as plot device to create tension between couples several times: with Chandler and Kathy in season 4, with Ross and Charlie in season 9, with Chandler and Monica in "The One with the Truth About London", and with Ross and Rachel in seasons 8-10.
Secret-Keeper: He's the first one to learn of Chandler and Monica's Secret Relationship and keeps that knowledge to himself for several months until Rachel finds out.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man:
Manly Man to Chandler's Sensitive Guy. Generally, Joey will sleep with girls for a night and Chandler will make them breakfast the next morning.
In later seasons, he is also the Manly foil to nerdy Sensitive Guy Ross. We see this dynamic more often after Chandler starts spending more time with Monica.
Sex God: He is sometimes portrayed as an extremely satisfying lover.
Shipper on Deck: A hardcore one for Chandler/Monica as he helps hide their relationship for months, officiates at their wedding and tells Chandler that they're perfect for each other and going to be together forever.
Simple-Minded Wisdom: Despite Joey's intelligence, there are times where he's given worthy advice to his friends, even though it's given in his usual foolish manner. For example, when Rachel asks about the healthy amount of time to wait before asking someone out, Joey tells her "The big question is, does he like you?", stating that her feelings for him will be doomed from the start if he doesn't like her back.
Sleeps in the Nude: Joked about at least twice. In one example, it resulted in Chandler Screaming at Squick.
Smart Ball: Once in a while, he can be inexplicably cunning, fire off weird but practical knowledge or think brilliantly outside the box, and then go right back to being a ditz, sometimes in the same sentence. Joey was also the only one in the group to figure out on his own that Ross had a thing for Rachel (Chandler being Ross' confidant and the girls finding out when the secret was blown). He was also the only one to figure out on his own that Chandler and Monica were together (Rachel accidentally heard them having phone sex, and Phoebe and Ross saw them having sex).
Supreme Chef: While he's been shown making a few errors (such as being unable to flip flapjacks well), he's been shown to pretty decent cook in his own right on occasion, with "The One with the Cooking Class", even hinting that he could potentially be good enough to rival Monica.
Test Subject for Hire: He would do this between acting jobs. Some examples:
In "The One Where Rachel Finds Out", he's participating in a fertility study requiring him to abstain from sex during the duration.
In "The One With The Unagi" he needs money again, so he considers returning to medical experimentation. However, the only study open at the time is being conducted on identical twins. Joey tries hiring a lookalike to pretend to be his twin brother, but it doesn't work.
The '40s: Perhaps to highlight their friendship, Joey and Chandler start the series with elements of the forties aesthetic. Whereas Chandler is a suburbanite in his bowling shirts, Joey starts the show as a womanizing greaser, though he loses the leather jacket pretty quickly.
Too Dumb to Fool: While he's dimwitted for the most part, he is capable of becoming exceptionally quick or suspicious, especially when his friends lie to him.
Took a Level in Dumbass: He seems to have lost quite a few IQ points over the years, to the point where in the final season he can't tell left from right.
Took a Level in Kindness: He is pretty much a Jerk with a Heart of Gold in early seasons. From season 4 onwards, his caring nature, Undying Loyalty, and close relationship with everyone in the group are emphasized much more.
Trademark Favorite Food: Most Italian dishes, especially meatball sub sandwiches, lasagna, and the "Joey Special."note 
Undying Loyalty: Probably his main redeeming factor on the show. He can often be very shallow and dimwitted but is a very loyal friend to the rest of them, ranging from trying to ignore his feelings for Rachel out of respect for Ross to volunteering to get a job at Monica's restaurant just so that she can fire him and get her staff to respect her.
Unmanly Secret: Despite being a tough adult man, he has a stuffed toy penguin named Huggsy.
Very Fake Résumé: His acting resume is full of "special skills" that are actually a pack of lies. Over the course of the series we learn he's claimed extensive dance training in multiple disciplines (ballet, tap and modern dance), fluency in French, archery, horseback riding, guitar playing, and "can drink a gallon of milk in 10 seconds". It also claims he can do a Southern accent, but every time he tries it comes out Jamaican. He explains to Monica that he was always taught that you should say "yes" to whatever is asked of you in an audition, and try to work out how to do whatever it is when you get the part.
I Was Young and Needed the Money: Joey was once in a porn movie because he was "young, and needed some money". When he couldn't go through with it, they let him play a guy who walks in during a sex scene to watch the couple have sex on the photocopier. At least he had a speaking bit, "You know, that's bad for the paper tray." But, being Joey, he seems genuinely proud of his role and quite happily sits down to watch it with the gang and point out his appearance.
Yuri Fan: Is the most likely one to suggest that Girl-on-Girl is Hot.