Ambiguously Bi: While her attraction to men and love for Chandler is definitely confirmed, she also occasionally makes suggestive comments about other women. In "The One With Phoebe's Rats", Rachel asks Monica what she thinks the guys see in the hot nanny Molly, to which Monica responds that she wouldn't kick her out of bed. She also becomes jealous when Phoebe says that she'd rather date Rachel than her at one point, plus there's this exchange in "The One With the Sharks":
Joey: Hey, this girl won't turn around and I can't tell whether she's hot or not. What do you think?
Monica: Joey, I am not going to objectify women with you... [looks at woman's back] But if her face is as nice as her ass, ooh momma!
I Am Not My Father: Or mother in her case. Determined not to end up like Judy.
Attention Whore: Often combined with her It's All About Me attitude in later seasons. However, it's mostly sympathetic since it likely stems from her childhood where her parents frequently ignored her and showered praise on Ross for every little thing he did.
Examples include when she gives a speech about her (and Chandler's) wedding.
Monica: Okay, umm, I just wanna say that... I love you guys so so much and thank you for being here on my special night. [Chandler clears his throat]... our special night. I mean it just wouldn’t be your, our night, if you all weren't here to celebrate with me... us... Damnit!
Chandler: It's okay, I want this to be your night too. [Raises his glass] To Monica.
Monica: Awww, come on, wait, stop it... okay, to Monica!
Her Egocentric Team Naming in "The One with the Ball".
Monica: Let's go, Team Monica!
[murderous glares]
Monica: Okay, we'll think of a name later.
Berserk Button:
Mostly involving tidiness.
Anytime there's a competition, no matter how seemingly insignificant.
Beta Couple: She and Chandler become this to main couple Ross and Rachel in the later seasons. However, they vary from the classic Beta couple mould as a lot of screen time is given to their developing relationship and they certainly face problems.
Betty and Veronica: When Richard comes back in season 6 and still in love with her, she becomes The Archie to Chandler's Betty (her current and stable Love Interest) and Richard's Veronica (her troubled love from the past).
Big Eater: She was shown to be like this as a child, most likely related to her numerous compulsive tendencies. Her parents were even once shown asking her to eat excess Thanksgiving leftovers when they ran out of space in the fridge and the show presented this as a typical request. Other examples were Ross going to get her a dozen Linzer Tortes as a snack, and her baking and eating dozens of cookies being a regular Friday night for her.
Big "NO!": Gave one when she and Rachel lost the trivia contest.
Boyish Short Hair: Her hair is at the shortest in season 4, even compared to the pilot. She grows her hair longer in later seasons again.
Brainy Brunette: Being the mature Team Mom, she has more common sense than Rachel and Phoebe who are both fair-haired.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: Judy emotionally abuses her in the same way her grandmother abused Judy. As Monica's aware of this, adores children and is generally kind-hearted, it's implied she'll break the cycle with her own children.
Butt-Monkey: In the first couple of seasons, she was (along with Chandler) the one who the rest of the friends thought would never get married, and despite being the Team Mom, was viewed by the others as being too quirky and was often teased for it. Her parents give her a hard time about not being married, and not being Ross, pretty much whenever they can. This goes away pretty much entirely in the later seasons, though, if only to focus more on Chandler and Ross being this trope. And also to help express the other characters surprise at Chandler getting married—to Monica, no less
Cannot Keep a Secret: At one point, Monica learns that Gary is gonna ask Phoebe to move in with him, and asks that she doesn't tell Phoebe. Monica manages to hold out for a full 25 seconds before blabbing.
Catchphrase:
I KNOW!
Her hyper-chipper "OKAY!" when all gets resolved.
Her Big Nos are fairly epic.
Childhood Friends: With Rachel, they grew up together. While they drifted apart during their college years, they become best friends again during in their mid twenties when Rachel moves in with Monica and Rachel "grows up" with her more practical friend.
Clingy Jealous Girl: In one episode, she believes that Chandler is cheating on her with one of his co-workers.
Competition Freak: Particularly from season 5 onwards, she's obsessed with winning and proving she's better than the others.
Chandler: You know how competitive you get, and while I say it's cute, others disagree and I'm lying.
Control Freak: Could easily be the Trope Codifier. Especially after Flanderization, she's a perfectionist who freaks out if something's slightly out of place.
Cute Bruiser: Monica is the shortest of the main characters, but she's very strong and tough.
Daddy's Girl: Although she resents her parents for apparently preferring Ross she actually has a very close relationship with her father, Jack Gellar, who refers to her as "his little Harmonica".
Dark Horse Sibling: Zigzagged. She didn't start out this way with Ross having a doctorate, being the first of his friends to get married (to a great woman nonetheless), being a respected work of a museum, and getting papers published while she had a respectable if humble living. After the loss of her job, Monica slowly, but surely rebuilds her life and is the first of her friends to stay married, gets an amazing job at a high-end restaurant, and even moves into a nice house. While Ross ends up fine too, his path was more fluctuating and left behind a trail so embarrassing he's better off leaving the past in the past.
Dating What Daddy Hates: Her parents dislike Chandler initially because they think he smoked pot (actually Ross did). They warm up to him though and thank him for 'taking on Monica'. They also disapprove of her relationship with Richard, not because they don't like him (he's their best friend), they just don't like him with their daughter.
Determinator: When Monica wants something, nothing will stop her.
Dude Magnet: Since losing weight, just as much as Rachel and Phoebe. Besides her three main love interests, she has multiple men hitting on her throughout the series, including Joey, Timothy Burke, Alan, Fun Bobby, Rachel's high school ex, a diplomatic translator and several one-off love interests. Her main issue is around finding a long-term relationship and not just flings, and she ultimately has fewer boyfriends than the other girls because she spends six seasons in a committed relationship with Chandler.
'80s Hair: In the earlier seasons. Though it was one of the few styles (bangs) that managed to remain well into the mid-90's.
Everyone Has Standards: Although she Likes Older Men who have known her since childhood like Richard, Monica draws the line at flat-out statutory rape. In "The One with the Ick Factor", she lies about her age so she can sleep with Ethan, saying she's 22 instead of 26 (or "25 and 13 months" to be exact). However, upon discovering that Ethan also lied about his age, saying he's a senior in college instead of a 17-year-old minor in high school, she ends the relationship immediately out of pure disgust, rightly pointing out that at least her lie didn't make one of them a felon across most of the United States.
Fanservice with a Smile: Subverted pretty hard in her job as a short-order cook in a 1950s-themed diner, where her costume consists of a blonde wig and massive padded breasts that is mostly played for comedy that Monica herself finds degrading.
Fat Best Friend: To Rachel, in their high school days. She was overweight, insecure, and lived in Rachel's shadow.
Fat Comic Relief: Downplayed. The flashback and what could have been episodes do play off Monica's weight for laughs, like her parents assuming she'd finish off the leftovers and her getting stuck in a beanbag. But she is still the same character who is just more obsessed with food and isn't confident.
Feminine Women Can Cook: Inverted. Monica is a professional chef, but she - especially post-Flanderization — is feisty, loud, competitive and downright domineering, especially with Chandler. By the last seasons, she was probably the least feminine of the girls. In "The One with Rachel's Sister", Monica bought a different set of wedding china than the ones Chandler picked out, because in her words, the ones Chandler picked out were "too feminine."
The Finicky One: Obsessed with cleanliness, controlling over even the most simple of past times and known to fits of neurotics when the slightest thing is out of place.
Flanderization: Her neatness, bossiness and competitiveness. Possibly justified as her job as a head chef is not only incredibly stressful but requires a headstrong personality.
Formerly Fat: Former Trope Namer. Monica was famously very fat in her younger days and many jokes on the show revolve around this. Her "Fat Monica" version is often seen in flashback episodes.
Girl Next Door: More so in early seasons, as she becomes bossier post-flanderization. She is down to earth, maternal, and The Heart of the group. She lives across the hall from Joey (who was originally going to be her love interest) and Chandler (her eventual boyfriend and husband).
Go-Getter Girl: An adult version of a hard-working woman who strives to be perfect in every respect.
Gourmet Chef Downscales: Zig-zagged: Monica is a professional chef who usually works in high-scale restaurants. In Season 2 however, she gets fired for inadvertently taking bribes in the form of free food from the vendors. Monica finds a job at a kitschy '50s-themed diner, where she's forced to wear a waitress costume with Fake Boobs and occasionally perform musical numbers for the customers. After doing a brief stint catering with Phoebe in season 4, she returns to being a restaurant chef and remains so for the rest of the series.
Happily Married: To Chandler in the last three seasons. The universe puts them through a lot early on: a long-distance relationship, unemployment, and infertility, but they remain incredibly happy and adore each other. They're especially impressive given their significant emotional baggage that stacks the odds against them. Namely, Chandler's parent's terrible marriage and home life which caused his Commitment Issues, Monica's insecurity from Parental Neglect and their highly neurotic natures.
The Heart: Ross even called her "the glue that holds the group together". She's Ross' sister, Rachel's friend since childhood, Chandler's Love Interest, Phoebe's former roommate who introduced her to her other friends, and Joey's mother figure, especially when it comes to food.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Rachel. They have been friends their whole lives who drifted apart during their college years. They become best friends again during in their mid-twenties when Rachel moves in with Monica and Rachel "grows up" with her more practical friend. With Phoebe too, them living in the same apartment before the start of series.
Hot-Blooded: She shares this trait with her brother Ross, as they are both fierce, energetic, and passionate.
Humidity-Induced Frizz: In the two-parter, "The One In Barbados", Monica's hair gets very fluffy because of the humidity in Barbados. Her hair is played for laughs throughout this episode and the next two, with Chandler feeling turned off by it and comparing it to Diana Ross.
Hypocrite: Called Ross immature for not trusting Rachel when Mark got involved even though she ran out on her wedding, but when Chandler was with the regional vice president (who was very attractive) she became incredibly jealous even though Chandler didn't show the slightest bit of attraction.
Hypocritical Heartwarming: A pretty common theme about her relationship with Chandler, as she could be pretty domineering with him, but was fiercely loyal the instant anyone else bothered him. Best seen while getting their photos for their wedding announcement and Chandler is failing miserably.
Monica: This photo is supposed to say "Geller and Bing to be Married", not "Local Woman Saves Drowning Moron." [the photographer laughs] Hey, don't laugh at him. He's my drowning moron.
Informed Deformity: Fat Monica. From the way everybody on the show talks, you'd think she was a two ton blimp. She's notably larger than average, but not that big (mildly obese, at most).
Informed Judaism: The Gellers' religious affiliation isn't clear until season 7, when Ross appears as the Holiday Armadillo, and then the only other mention is three seasons later, when Chandler has to remind Monica she can't be a minister because she's Jewish. Considering the care she gives to decorating the Christmas tree, we might not have known. The creators have said in the past that Jack Geller is Jewish, whilst Judy is not.
Innocent Beta Bitch: She was this to Rachel when they were in high school. As seen in the flashbacks, Rachel was a spoiled cheerleader (and confirmed to be an Alpha Bitch by some old classmates), while Monica was her insecure and naive Fat Best Friend. However, in the present day, Monica has the more dominant personality of the two.
Innocently Insensitive: Her perfectionist attitude can rub people the wrong way without meaning to:
She once got an offer to make an entire menu for a new restaurant and wanted to hire her more experienced coworker as a waitress over Rachel who needed the money more.
She feels uncomfortable letting Rachel and Chandler moving things they like into her apartment because it doesn't match the furniture even though it's their apartment too in the respective seasons
In-Series Nickname: Mon.
It's All About Me: Sometimes, including her response to Rachel saying her pregnancy isn't as big a deal as Monica's wedding "Of course not, nothing is!"; literally saying the wedding is all about her.
Jailbait Mistake: Monica dates Ethan, who tells her he's a college senior. After having sex, he informs her he lied about his age and is actually a high school senior and is 17 years old. Monica is disturbed and breaks up with him.
Jerkass Ball: Grabs it in "The One with Phoebe's Wedding", where Phoebe gets justifiably tired of her control freaking the wedding rehearsal. She never says sorry, gloats when Phoebe freaks out at having to do everything on her own wedding day, and Phoebe has to beg her to come back.
Law of Inverse Fertility: Of the three female leads, Monica is the one who wanted to become a mother the most, openly longing for a baby and ending her relationship with Richard because he wasn't willing to have more children. While Phoebe and Rachel have no problems getting pregnant, it's Monica who ends up struggling with infertility.
Like Brother and Sister: With Joey in later seasons. This is mainly because Monica gets together with Chandler, who Joey considers his "brother" and the trio form a mini-family within the True Companions. Monica feeds Joey for years, they include a "Joey Room" in their new house, and frequently act as his older sibling.
The Maiden Name Debate: When she and Chandler are engaged he asks if she's going to take his name. She immediately says no because "Bing is weird". In one episode Phoebe refers to her as "Geller hyphen Bing" implying she did change her name, but then when Phoebe gets married and asks how to do that Monica finally admits she didn't change her name. Chandler is disappointed for a few seconds before remembering that he never liked Bing anyway.
Mama Bear: While not as pronounced as her general Team Mom behavior, she's very protective of the other girls, as well as Chandler, particularly after they become a couple.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: Masculine Girl to Chandler's Feminine Boy. In one episode, Monica bought a different set of wedding china than the ones Chandler picked out, because in her words, the ones Chandler picked out were "too feminine."
Ms. Fanservice: Perhaps more so than Rachel. She is seen in lingerie and seductive clothes very often.
Muscles Are Meaningless: She has a pretty slender, wiry build in the present day but is frequently implied to be "freakishly strong" and underestimates her own strength. She's able to easily subdue a panicky Rachel while trying to put drops in her eyes, gives back massages that border on torture, and after a painful handshake with her, Phoebe comments that she's glad she's not Chandler. According to Ross, the only person in the group stronger than her is Joey.
My Beloved Smother: When she gets caught up in the moment of her adopted son being born, she tells him that she's "gonna love [him] so much that no woman is ever gonna be good enough for [him]."
Mysterious Middle Initial: Her middle name begins with an "E" but the audience never learns what it is. Apparently even Phoebe doesn't know Monica's middle name as she has to guess it when signing for a delivery.
Neat Freak: She can't sleep after she willingly leaves her shoes in the living room in order to prove she's not as much of a Neat Freak as everybody thinks. Everybody's right, of course. Also, she vacuums her vacuum cleaner with a smaller one, and wishes for an even smaller one to clean the second.
Nerds Love Tough Schoolwork: Which shows up when she accompanies Phoebe to night school, where she convinces the teacher to give the students a test next week.
Never My Fault: In "The One After the Super Bowl: apart 2", Monica and Rachel meet Jean-Claude Van Damme and Monica wants to go out with him, but she’s too scared to ask him out, so Rachel goes to ask him out for her and he asked Rachel out instead. Then, when Rachel asked Monica’s permission to say yes to the date, Monica says yes, and Rachel immediately tells Jean-Claude she’ll go out with him. Monica then holds a grudge against Rachel for agreeing to go out with him. As Rachel points out, Monica said it was ok for Rachel to agree to the date, and if she wanted to go out with him, she should’ve asked him out herself.
Nice Girl: Despite her faults, she's genuinely kind-hearted.
Only Sane Woman: While she has her flaws, she's clearly "the mature one" of the six, given that Rachel can be a naïve and self-centered Spoiled Brat, Ross is an eccentric dork, Chandler is a constant Deadpan Snarker prone to immature antics, Joey is a dimwitted Manchild and a gigantic Casanova, and Phoebe is... Phoebe.
Parenting the Husband: In later seasons, she can treat Chandler like a child sometimes.
Monica: I want to have a kid with you because I think you're going to be an amazing dad. At the fun parts and at the hard parts.
Chandler: Can you picture me saying, "Go to your room! You're grounded!"
Monica: Can you hear me say you're grounded?
Chandler: You said that to me last week.
The Perfectionist: Especially in later seasons when Flanderization set in, she's crazily obsessed with being perfect and always wants to take charge.
Pint-Sized Powerhouse: The smallest main character and yet still able to wrestle down her much larger brother and win.
Plucky Girl: Not as much as Phoebe or Rachel, but she has her moments.
The Reliable One: She's the go-to person for support, advice and comfort, the designated cook, and always up for menial tasks.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Monica is Hot-Blooded and energetic, while Chandler is a Deadpan Snarker.
Second Love:
Specifically, the third serious love interest to Chandler, after Janice and Kathy.
She was also this to Richard. Much to her surprise, Monica finds out in one episode that she's the only woman Richard has slept with, after his first wife Barbara.
Secret Relationship: With Chandler for almost an entire season. Justifications included that at the start, neither of them dreamed that their London dalliance could become anything more than that. Plus, after seeing all of the drama induced by Ross and Rachel's relationship, Monica and Chandler thought it best to tell no one. And the other characters found out one by one.
Shipper on Deck: She supports Ross and Rachel obviously as they are her brother and her best friend, though her enthusiasm (as with most of the others) fades as the series and their on-off again relationship continues. She also ships Ross/Emily at one point.
Sibling Rivalry: Sometimes with Ross. Apparently, they were much more competitive during their childhood, particularly over football.
Single Girl Seeks Most Popular Guy: In high school, she always wanted to go out with Big Man on Campus Chip Matthews, who also used to date Rachel. She manages to date him many years later as an adult and realizes he was nothing special.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Monica dated the badass from her high school days and got to ride his motorcycle... but he hadn't ever grown out of that old persona and still lived with his parents, so she relished dumping him. Her first two serious boyfriends were Richard and Pete who both fit the "Nice Guy" stereotype pretty well. She ended up with her friend Chandler who was a nice guy, too.
Spirited Competitor: Monica is an intense competitor and wants to win, no matter how small or petty the challenge is. This applies to everything from sports to board games.
The Spock: Of the women. She's The Spock to Rachel's The Kirk and Phoebe's The McCoy.
Strong Family Resemblance: When the gang see a picture of Nana (Judy's mother) in her mid-20s, Rachel comments that Monica looks just like her.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: A sibling example. She's stated to be "freakishly strong", while her brother Ross is weak but the smartest of the group, at least academically.
Supreme Chef: Of course, she loves cooking and is a professional chef. She absolutely rules Thanksgiving amongst the group. Because Chandler refuses to eat any traditional Thanksgiving food because of his bad childhood memories, she started making him a small rotisserie chicken after they got married with no extra effort seen on her part.
Team Chef: She's a professional chef, so it's no surprise that she's always the one to make the food when there's a celebration.
Team Mom: The pilot episode alone has her calming Rachel's anxiety attack, comforting a depressed Ross, telling off Joey, restraining Phoebe's craziness and stopping Chandler from spying on her date. In later seasons, after she marries a much more mature Chandler, the pair act as Designated Parents for the gang, though he can still be goofy at times. Ironically, Monica is the second youngest of the group. Though it wouldn't be wise to call her that... as Chandler found out.
Tomboy and Girly Girl:
Tomboy to Rachel's Girly Girl. Monica is a mild version of tomboy since she loves cleaning and cooking, but personality-wise, she's domineering, loud and hot-tempered and has a Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy relationship with Chandler. She also likes sports, including football, and is the most strong and athletic of the six friends, along with Joey. Rachel, on the other hand, is sweet, ditzy, interested in fashion and shopping, and unlike Monica, she's bad at sports.
Briefly to Janine in season 6. Janine, a dancer who likes girly things like flowers, complains Monica is 'too loud' and runs away when Monica challenges her to fight it out.
Tomboy with a Girly Streak: She loves cleaning and cooking, longs to have a family and is obsessed with weddings.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Her bossiness and obsessive-compulsive behavior gradually shot up to eleven in later seasons.
Town Girls: The Hot-Blooded Butch to Phoebe's Granola Girl Neither and Rachel's The Fashionista Femme.
Trademark Favorite Drink: Her go-to drink order is a scotch on the rocks with a twist. In the sixth season finale, Chandler works out that she was in Richard's apartment because there's a glass of that drink on a coaster on the coffee table.
The Un-Favorite: Often criticized by her mother, Judy, the same way Judy had been criticized by her own mother. Also, both parents favored Ross, which their dad tries to rectify (seemingly successfully, judging by Monica's reaction) by giving Monica his Porsche.
Monica: I know they say you can't choose your parents but, boy, if you could, (turns to Ross) I'd want yours.
Violently Protective Girlfriend:
Monica has shades of this concerning Chandler. Notable in this exchange when they're having photos taken.
Monica: Chandler, what is the matter with your face? This picture's supposed to say "Geller and Bing to be married", not "Local woman saves drowning moron!"
[The photographer laughs]
Monica: Hey, don't laugh at him. He's my drowning moron.
On another occasion, she and Chandler were arguing with their neighbor Janine; things were pretty aggressive before, but it's when Janine insults Chandler that Monica cracks and gets physically violent.
Janine: [to Chandler] You know, I know you’re talking, but all I hear is, "Blah. Blah. Blah-blah-blah."
Monica: All right, you and me! Let’s go! Right now!
"Well Done, Daughter!" Girl: As a result of being The Un-Favorite. A later episode has her father affirming that he's proud of her but we never get such a scene with her mother (who was the worse of the two). However, it's hinted Monica gets over Judy's behavior, as she's Happily Married and a very successful head chef and her mother's favoritism of Ross (with three divorces and two illegitimate children) seems pathetic rather than hurtful.
What Does She See in Him?: After discovering Monica and Chandler are dating, Phoebe comments that "she could do better" and makes similar comments several times in later seasons. Played with as Chandler, despite his neuroses, is actually a great boyfriend and he and Monica are very happy together.
Phoebe: David's here. He's just... he's so irresistible.
Monica: Really? The scientist guy?
Phoebe: Really? Chandler?
Womanchild: Monica is the most mature of the friends, except on the few occasions where she becomes a Control Freak and the times where she gets into fights with Ross. Because of how competitive she is, she also often throws huge tantrums when things aren't going her away during any sort of game she plays against one of the others.
Women Prefer Strong Men: Inverted. She specifically breaks up with Pete because he's obsessed with becoming the Ultimate Fighting Champion and tells Chandler straight up that she doesn't care how strong he is because she loves his inner strength instead.