All Guys Want Cheerleaders: Rachel claimed that she had never failed to score when wearing her cheerleader uniform, leading to her donning it at a party in a desperate attempt to win the attention of Joshua in "The One with the Fake Party". It ends with her falling down and biting her lip. That said, it still works.
Alpha Bitch: While she's much sweeter as an adult (if not without a bit of a rude, selfish, self-absorbed side) by all accounts, Rachel was basically a 1980s version of Regina George - a mean and arrogant popular girl who ruled her high school. Multiple ex-classmates of Rachel (and Monica) appear in the series and talk about what a bitch she was in high school.
Ambiguously Jewish: She's never said to be Jewish on the show and she celebrates Christmas. On the other hand, she fits the Jewish American Princess stereotype, has a Jewish-sounding name and uses the Yiddish word "bubbe" referring to her grandmother. When Phoebe is writing a holiday song, she tries the line "spin the dreidel, Rachel"; Rachel's only objection is that this doesn't rhyme. Years later, both David Crane and Marta Kauffman said they wrote her as Jewish.
I Am Not My Father: Part of the reason she fights so hard to build her career is because she's determined not to end up like her mother: a Rich Bitch who's financially dependent on others and trapped in a loveless marriage. In "TOW Phoebe's Cookies" her attempts to teach Joey to sail make her realise she's taking after her father instead.
Rachel: I've been trying so hard not to be my mother that I did not see this coming.
The Baby of the Bunch: Both literally ("The One Where They All Turn Thirty" shows her as the youngest, being the last of the group to hit the milestone,) and figuratively (her spoiled, sheltered upbringing left her the least self-sufficient of the six, with much of her first-season storylines involve getting her first job, being less dependent on her parents and their money, and generally learning to stand on her own two feet.)
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Ross, after their breakup in season 3. Also with her co-worker Gavin in season 9, although he only appears in three episodes.
Berserk Button:
Don't tell her that she and Ross were on a break. On the other hand, don't tell Ross that they weren't on a break.
Don't mess about on any sailing boat Rachel's on. She's inherited her father's intolerance for not respecting the dangers of being at sea.
Better as Friends: With Joey, after they briefly attempt to date late in the series. After their first date, they realize they can't have a sexual relationship because they are too close as friends.
Betty and Veronica:
The Veronica to Julie's Betty for Ross' Archie.
The Betty to Bonnie's Veronica also for Ross' Archie.
Big Sister Instinct: Rachel loves her sisters dearly, but there are times where they test her patience, especially when they drag in their niece and future brother-in-law.
Book Dumb: She doesn't know the plot of Wuthering Heights or who was the enemy in World War I (though neither did some of the others). She even actually believes Phoebe when she sarcastically says that the plot of Jane Eyre involves cyborgs. She didn't seem to have any trouble with Little Women though.
Cannot Spit It Out: Happens to her often when she likes someone. With Ross in season 2 (subverted in the first episode of season 5), with Joshua in season 4, and with Joey in season 9.
Catchphrase: Her long drawn-out Oh, Crap! expression of "Nooooo..."
Character Development: While Rachel started out as spoiled, selfish and somewhat incompetent, she eventually became a successful, independent career woman and a mother.
Character Tic: Whenever she comes up with a lie, Rachel tends to swipe her hair.
Childhood Friends: She and Monica grew up together. While they drifted apart during their college years, they become best friends again during in their mid twenties when Rachel moves in with Monica and Rachel "grows up" with her more practical friend.
Clingy Jealous Girl: She easily gets jealous whenever Ross gets a new girlfriend (especially Julie and Bonnie) and sometimes she even tries to ruin their relationship or antagonize Ross' new girlfriend. In fact, she doesn't like it whenever the person she has a crush on is close with another woman. She later displays the same attitude towards Charlie, Joey's new girlfriend, after Rachel falls for him.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: To both her sisters. They mostly appear to be spoiled and clueless, so the post-Character Development Rachel can be the mature one.
Cool Aunt: While not his actual Aunt, Rachel is delighted when Ross' son, Ben, starts calling her his 'Fun Aunt Rachel' after she teaches him some practical jokes, much to Ross' chagrin.
Cordon Bleugh Chef: Her attempt at making a dessert from a cookbook with two pages glued together results in the trope namer for It Tastes Like Feet.
Cruel Cheerleader: Formerly. She's fairly likable as an adult (most of the time), but by all accounts, she was an Alpha Bitch during her teen years.
Daddy's Girl: Dr. Green's favorite daughter and the one he is the most proud of. She was very glad to learn that.
Dating What Daddy Hates: While they managed to hit it off early in the series after a while her father really doesn't like Ross and the feeling is mutual.
Daytime Drama Queen: She loves soap operas and is often seen watching them. After Joey gets cast on Days of Our Lives several plots involve him bringing her to set or introducing her to castmates and getting embarrassed when she turns into a Fangirl around them.
The Ditz: She starts out as one as she was clueless concerning any real-life skills, but thanks to Character Development, she becomes a lot more sensible and capable.
Drives Like Crazy: She's a terrible driver, and this is why she's the only one whom Monica doesn't let drive the Porsche.
Dude Magnet: She was one in high school and she's still one as an adult.
Aside from all her suitors and/or boyfriends, both Gunther and Ross (and later Joey) remain madly in love with her throughout the show's duration.
When Chandler tries to set her up with one of his co-workers, after showing Rachel's picture, at least 20 guys were throwing themselves at Chandler and giving him presents to get a chance to date her.
When Joey hosts a party for his soap opera co-stars, she ends up with a huge pile of tissues, which were all the guys who gave her their phone numbers.
Dumbass No More: Starts out as being the most naïve and arguably least intelligent of the six, but by the second season, is really just Book Dumb and is actually very quick-witted and clever, often deceiving other characters (for good or for bad) with great success.
Even the Girls Want Her: Her college friend, played by Winona Ryder, is still in love with her.
Extreme Doormat: An Informed Attribute of the episode "The One with the Joke", in which Rachel is accused of being a "pushover" who gets intimidated easily. Usually averted, because she's almost never portrayed as this (quite the opposite, especially when it comes to Ross). She's less brash and assertive than Monica and Phoebe, but not to the point of being a doormat.
Eye Scream: Rachel's phobia. An episode involving Rachel with an eye infection reveals Rachel freaks out every time someone gets close to touching an eye.
Fangirl: Of soap operas; Joey tells her that he hides his cast parties from her because of this trope, since she fawns over all the actors. When she finds out Cecilia Monroe, one of her favourite actresses, slept with Joey, she goes screaming across the hall to get Monica so they can Squee at her together.
Fanservice with a Smile: Downplayed in the sense that her outfits from when she was waitressing at Central Perk weren't much more revealing or fanservice-y than her regular attire, mostly by dint of the fact that her regular clothing was already pretty heavy on the fanservice all on its own with her fondness for short skirts. Considering by her own admission she was an awful, awful waitress, it's safe to assume what little success she had in the job was due to her looks (and Gunther's massive crush on her.)
The Fashionista: She quits her job as a waitress in season 3 to pursue a career in fashion. She eventually becomes an executive at Ralph Lauren.
First Girl Wins: Of course. She is Ross' first love and the one who ends up with him at the end.
Genius Ditz: She's a bit catty, but handy with working a boat.
Girly Bruiser: Surprisingly. Rachel is not very athletic and has been described as a pushover, yet in "The One with the Girl Who Hits Joey", she has no problem beating up Joey's Pint-Sized Powerhouse girlfriend.
Girly Girl with a Tomboy Streak: She is a spoiled rich fashionista stereotype, but being Joey's roommate in later seasons brings out the The Lad-ette side of her. She starts having fun with him, by dropping food on the floor, throwing huge spitballs at the entertainment center, or sitting in the reclining chairs while drinking beer (the things Joey used to do with Chandler). In one episode, Phoebe gives Joey drums, hoping this would annoy Rachel, but it doesn't work because Joey and Rachel start playing drums together. The same episode also reveals Rachel loves tarantulas and used to have one as a kid.
Global Ignorance: Starting in Season 8, she is shown to have terrible geography skills such as not knowing the capital of Sweden even right after Phoebe told her, and Ross even says she doesn't know where any countries are.
Gold Digger: In her backstory. Subverted as she couldn't bring herself to marry Barry and left him at the altar in the pilot episode. She does, however, encourage Monica to date billionaire, Pete Becker, despite not loving him and gets very excited about having a 'money-themed' wedding.
Guilty Pleasures: She claims her favorite movie is Dangerous Liaisons - it's actually Weekend at Bernie's. She also keeps steamy romance novels hidden under the pillow for late-night reading.
Has a Type: Rachel has a thing for doctors in the earliest seasons. The show brings up and then hastily backs away from the revelation that her father is a doctor. In season 9, she also starts being attracted to Joey, after she has a dream about him acting as Dr. Drake Ramoray. And in "The One The Could Have Been" she ends up developing feelings for Joey's character Dr. Drake Ramoray. Eventually, she ends up with Ross, who's Not That Kind of Doctor.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Monica, who has been her best friend since childhood. Becomes this with Phoebe too - mostly in later seasons where they spend more time together.
Hypocrite:
She becomes upset upon learning that Ross spread a rumor about her being a hermaphrodite during high school (which spread to other high schools in the area) and claims that she would never do a thing like that to him. Monica reminds her that she did spread a rumor about him (specifically about him hooking up with the older librarian). She claims what Ross did was worse because at least her rumor turned out to be true.
Rachel declines pursuing Ross because he's in the middle of a divorce, claiming she doesn't go for divorced guys — Monica points out that she almost crashed Ross' wedding to tell him she still loved him.
In "The One That Could Have Been", which takes place in an alternate timeline, she complains about men not respecting wedding vows after her husband cheats on her with the dog walker. Ross quickly points out that she just spent the night at Joey's with the intention of sleeping with him, which she blows off.
She asks Ross to take Emily to the opera, saying that she thought that her and Ross have both moved on. When she finds out that Ross and Emily had a good time and have started dating, she acts jealous and annoyed.
Overall, her constant angry denial whenever someone tells her that she and Ross were on a break doesn't have much of a leg to stand on when Rachel not only initiated said break in the first place, but was also the first person to say the infamous catchphrase "we were on a break", not Ross (although he definitely says it way more than her). In "The One That Could Have Been", Rachel even wishes that she and her then-husband, Barry, could be on a break just so that she can be with Joey instead.
Informed Attractiveness: Like Monica and Phoebe, she tends to get hyped up as absolutely gorgeous.
Inherently Attractive Profession:
Rachel's obsession with doctors was something of a Running Gag.
Paul Stevens (played by Bruce Willis) is an older guy who dates Rachel. She's delighted that he's a successful lawyer.
In-Series Nickname: Rach.
It's All About Me: She's pretty self-absorbed. Examples include trying to crash Ross' wedding and earlier that season, she forced Ross to forgo his plans to have a private farewell dinner with Emily to throw a going-away party "for Emily" when really, it's just so she can win the affections of Joshua when she claimed they were throwing the party to get some one-on-one time with him.
It Tastes Like Feet: In the incident when she makes a half Trifle, half Shepherd's pie in "The One Where Ross Got High", Ross claims her resultant dish "tastes like feet".
Jerkass Has a Point: Invoked In-Universe. When she was nine months pregnant and a much bigger jerk than usual, she tells Ross not to call her “mommy” and that it’s bad enough he still calls his actual mother that; to which, Monica agrees with when Ross turned to her for support.
Also she’s not wrong when she says that Ross has unresolved feelings for her as he says her name at the altar when he’s getting married to Emily.
Despite her repeated refusal to accept her part in her and Ross' relationship falling apart in the first place, at least one point when called out on it, she does make the fair retort that if Ross were in her shoes, he'd react just as badly. Given Ross has repeatedly proved to be just as petty, self-absorbed, and irrational as Rachel when pressed, it's not hard to believe, especially after he visibly struggled to form a counterargument when Rachel directly confronted him on this point.
Karma Houdini:
During the misunderstanding between her, Joey, and Ross when she thought Joey proposed to her, Ross fully blames Joey instead of her because she had his (Ross') baby.
She once stole Monica's car and drove it without a license. When she was caught by traffic police for driving above the speed limit, she managed to get away with it by flirting. Ross later attempts to flirt when pulled over for driving too slow and is humiliated when it fails and he's unable to talk his way out.
The Kirk: Of the women. She's The Kirk to Phoebe's The McCoy and Monica's The Spock.
Lethal Chef: Due to some pages of a cookbook sticking together, she bakes a concoction that is a half trifle and half shepard's pie.
Longest Pregnancy Ever: Lasting from May 2001 to August 2002. And then evoked in-verse, as she's two weeks overdue, and spends nearly a full 24 consecutive hours in labor.
Lovable Alpha Bitch: A former classmate mentions just how horrible she was in high school, but she was friends with the unpopular, overweight Monica. She still retains some traits of this as an adult.
Love Makes You Dumb: Although it wasn't really love, just attraction, Rachel makes a total fool of herself when she has a crush on Joshua in season 4.
Love Makes You Evil: Downplayed. Every time she sees Ross with a new girlfriend, she will go to great lengths to make sure their relationship ends on a sour note. And not just Ross; she does it to every guy she develops a crush on, including Joey.
Love Revelation Epiphany: With Ross, who she only began to fall in love with after hearing secondhand that he loved her when Chandler lets the then-secret slip. When she goes to meet him at the airport upon his return from China, she comes face-to-face with his new girlfriend.
Mama Bear: When she hears Emma crying and realizes someone is in her room near Emma, not realizing it is Joey, she immediately threatens the person to get away from the crib. She also started a Cat Fight with her sister after Amy said Emma wasn't cute.
Maternally Challenged: When she and Ross are dating she has no idea how to even hold baby Ben, and needs Monica's help to keep him entertained while babysitting. At her baby shower in season eight she doesn't know what any of the baby items she's being given are, and she's three weeks away from her due date. She explains to her mother that she focused all her research on pregnancy and forgot to study what happens after the baby arrives. Ross assures her that every first-time parent has to go through this and that he can catch her up. After Emma is born she makes some mistakes, like waking her up from a nap instead of letting her sleep, but seems to have got the hang of parenthood.
Ms. Fanservice: In early seasons, her nipples are visible through her shirt and she gets naked in the apartment the night before she and Ross go to Las Vegas (which Ross mistakes for a come-on), as well as being accidentally interrupted in the shower by Chandler. Her "New Dress" in the appropriately-titled episode is basically her very clad nightie.
My Beloved Smother: After Emma is born, she calls her doctor so often that he eventually drops her as a client. She then becomes worried Ross is sick with the one illness Emma has not been vaccinated for, rubella (despite clearly not knowing what rubella actually is).
My Sister Is Off-Limits: She does this when Joey tries hitting on Jill.
Naïve Newcomer: In season 1.
Monica: Welcome to the real world. It sucks. You're going to love it.
Never My Fault: She blamed Ross for everything that went wrong in their relationship. She even tried to get him to sign a document that said so. She becomes such a Smug Snake about it that Ross snaps and leaves her.
Ross: [snaps] And for the record, it took two people to break up this relationship!
Rachel: [outraged] Yeah! You, and that girl from the copy place!
'90s Hair: Her haircut from the first two seasons became one of the defining hairstyles of the 1990s.
Not a Morning Person: The apartment-swap plotline in season 4 began when Rachel lost her temper after the Chick woke her up at 6 am with his crowing. She ended up in Joey's old bedroom, and became more than a little annoyed with the guy in the next building over waking her up every morning by loudly and enthusiastically singing. Her frustration with him doing it even on a Saturday prompts her and Monica to finally come up with a way to force the boys to swap the apartments back. Lampshaded by Monica when Rachel storms across the hall to yell at the guys for the noise the Chick is making:
Monica: Boy, you are really not a morning person—
Rachel: [through gritted teeth] BACK OFF!
Oblivious to Love: She often doesn't realize it when men are in love with her, until they tell her. It happens with Ross in season 1, with Joey in season 8, and with Gunther for the entire show until the last episode when he reveals his feelings to her.
One-Note Cook: In an episode of season 3 where, despite the others' doubts, the brownies she makes receive no complaints (and even then, the doubts only came after Phoebe quickly spit hers out, which only came from a painful toothache). The same can't be said for the rest of her cooking attempts.
Picked Last: When the gang play touch football she's the last one chosen. As she points out to Ross he didn't "pick" her, he just got stuck with her. In "TOW the Lottery", Joey tells her that if he wins he'll buy the Knicks and put her on the team.
Rachel: You'd pick me? I never get picked!
Plastic Bitch: It's revealed that she had a nose job when she was a superficial and spoiled teenager.
Playing Hard to Get: Rachel plays hard to get with Joshua and with Danny. When Danny misinterprets this and introduces her to one of his friends, she thinks he's playing hard to get.
Plucky Girl: Thanks to her determination, she becomes a successful career woman.
Rough Overalls: Despite her rich upbringing, Rachel often wears overalls as a staple of the 90s.
Runaway Bride: Rachel ran away from her wedding in the pilot. This was the first event in the series and the cause of many problems for her, so it's basically the 'setup' for Rachel's character. It was later revealed that her groom was already cheating on her and an alternate universe episode showed that had she actually married him, the marriage would have been miserable and eventually collapsed due to his infidelity.
Secret Secret-Keeper: She finds out about Chandler and Monica's Secret Relationship when she accidentally overhears them talking on the phone. The couple have no idea she knows until Joey accidentally tells them a few episodes later.
Selective Obliviousness: For Ross' feelings, and later hers.
Sexy Sweater Girl: Not all the time (although this was The '90s), but enough that it's one of the things Monica mentions to make fun of her.
Monica: [mocking] Hi, I'm Rachel, is my sweater too tight? No? Oh, I'd better wash it and shrink it!
Spoiled Brat: In her backstory, as she was spoiled by her father for most of her life, and has shades of it as an adult before Character Development, because she's used to getting everything she wants.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: Girly Girl to Monica's Tomboy. Monica is a mild version of tomboy since she loves cleaning and cooking, but personality-wise, she's domineering, loud and hot-tempered and has a Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy relationship with Chandler. She also likes sports, including football, and is the most strong and athletic of the six friends, along with Joey. Rachel, on the other hand, is sweet, ditzy, interested in fashion and shopping, and unlike Monica, she's bad at sports.
Took a Level in Badass: In the pilot, she's a spoiled rich girl who's never had a job or paid any bills. By the end of the show, she's become quite successful in her chosen profession, and is a financially stable single mother.
Rachel's sister: Daddy told me to go learn from the only daughter he's actually proud of.
Rachel: [turning to Ross] Did you hear that? My dad's proud of me! [Beat] Right, not the point. [turning back]
Took a Level in Jerkass: Mainly in her treatment toward Ross, as both Ross and Rachel become petty to each other after their second break-up and in the following seasons.
Tsundere: Neatly summed up by Monica.
Monica: I'm Rachel. I love Ross! I hate Ross! I love Ross! I hate Ross!
Unknowingly in Love: Downplayed, since Rachel knew she loved Ross in the past, but when Ross was about to marry Emily, Rachel was genuinely surprised when Phoebe made her realize that she was still in love with him.
Rachel: Why didn't you tell me?
Phoebe: We thought you knew. It was so obvious. It would be like saying to Monica "Hey, you like things neat."
Unrequited Love Switcheroo:
Ross and Rachel do this so many times it's unbelievable. S1: Ross —> Rachel. S2: Rachel —> Ross then Ross —> Rachel. S3: Ross —> Rachel then Rachel —> Ross. S4/5: Rachel —> Ross. S6: Ross —> Rachel. S8/9: They swap per episode. S10: Ross —> Rachel.
Later in the series, it happens with Joey. In season 8, Joey falls in love with Rachel, but she turns him down, and he falls out of it. In season 9, she's the one who has a crush on him when he's dating Charlie.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With Ross. They would resolve it once, then something will go wrong, cue angry break-up, the UST will slowly build up again over time, over and over again.
Upper-Class Twit: In earlier seasons, when she was still recovering from her spoiled upbringing, she was clueless concerning any real-life skills, but thanks to Character Development she became a lot more sensible and capable.
Vocal Dissonance: She has a younger voice in the Japanese dub.
"Well Done, Daughter!" Gal: "You hear that, guys? My Dad's proud of me!"
What Does She See in Him?: The salesman in "The One with the Cop" can't believe that a woman like Rachel used to date Ross.
What the Hell, Hero?: During the flight to London, the guy sitting next to Rachel (played by Hugh Laurie) calls her a "horrible, horrible person" for attempting to ruin Ross and Emily's wedding and to further add insult to injury, he agrees that Ross and her were on a break.
White Sheep: Though she's no saint, Rachel at least has several redeeming features compared to her parents and sisters, a lot of it coming from the Character Development she went through making it on her own over the course of the show. Lampshaded with her sister Jill, who was just as spoiled and vain as Rachel was in the beginning, she was similarly cut off by their father and told to go learn something from "the one daughter he's proud of."
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Has a childhood fear of swings because she had an incident at 4 where her hair got stuck in the swing chain and she hat to cut off her hair, making it uneven.
Womanchild: Rachel has a childish need to be the center of attention, refuses to take responsibility for her own actions, and constantly whines to her friends about her personal problems. Not to mention everything she does to sabotage Ross's relationships and all the arguments she gets into with him. She also insists on playing high-school mind games with men she's interested in in an effort to maintain control over her love life.
Yaoi Fangirl: In one episode, when she reveals that she had a sexual fantasy dream involving a threesome with Chandler and Joey, she notes that at some of the points, she was merely a spectator watching the two of them getting busy.