Afraid of Needles: As seen in "The One with the Baby On The Bus" during which he has a severe allergic reaction to kiwi fruit and doesn't want to go to the hospital for a shot. He suggests that they could "take the needle and squirt it into my mouth, you know, like a squirt gun" instead. Monica says he can hold her hand while he gets the shot; he grips it so tightly, she ends up with a bone bruise and a puncture wound from her ring.
Allegedly Dateless: Despite his numerous girlfriends and dates during the show's run and him being kind of a Chick Magnet (evidenced by "The One with the Girl From Poughkeepsie" and "The One with the Cooking Class"), he's regularly referred to be as hopeless with women for some reason. There's even an episode named "The One Where Ross Can't Flirt", and Joey once said to him that he (and Chandler) "repels women all the time".
All There in the Manual: The creators state Ross' middle name is Eustace. The name "Eustace" was written in the original script for one episode of season 1, but the line was cut, so it never actually aired.
Amicably Divorced: With Carol. And with Rachel in the last few seasons. Not with Emily, though.
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Rachel after their breakup in season 3.
Berserk Button: He becomes extremely angry when someone at work eats his sandwich.
Ross: MY SANDWICH?
Betty and Veronica:
The Archie to Rachel's Veronica and Julie's Betty.
The Archie to Rachel's Betty and Bonnie's Veronica.
Big Brother Bully: To Monica, in their childhood. Monica admits that she hated Ross as a kid because he was mean and always making fun of her. While there's still some Sibling Rivalry, they get along much better as adults.
Monica: I hated you. I mean I, I, loved you in a 'you're my brother so I have to' kind of way, but basically, yeah, I hated your guts.
Ross: Why did you hate me?
Monica: Because, you were mean to me and you, you teased me and you always, always got your way.
Ross: And that wasn't fun for you?
Big Brother Instinct: Despite their occasional squabbles, he's deeply protective of Monica. At Monica and Chandler's wedding, he tells Chandler that if he ever hurts his little sister, he will hunt him down and kick his ass. Of course, since it's Ross, everyone just starts laughing at him—until he proves that he wasn't kidding when he lays Chandler flat out and tells him "you're not running out on my sister!"
Born Unlucky: Something bad always happen to him in almost every episode. Even something as simple as getting a spray-on tan ends up with him getting tanned unevenly.
Butt-Monkey: The whole cast go through instances of getting dumped on, but poor Ross seems to have become the official Butt-Monkey in later seasons, ending up the victim of failed attempts, misunderstandings and overreactions one right after another. His romantic life is cruelly wrecked by said misunderstandings and overreactions, and his somewhat pathetic, lovesick nature makes sure he always suffers the full impact without ever really getting to stand up for himself and make an honest effort at a healthy relationship.
The Cameo: He makes an appearance in The Single Guy.
Cannot Spit It Out: Ross doesn't tell Rachel he loves her for the entire first season of the show, chickening out every time the opportunity arises. This has the unfortunate result of Rachel only finding out from Chandler while Ross is on a trip to China, and when she realizes she loves him too, he's already met someone else there.
Catchphrase: His distinctive "Hi" and "We were on a break!".
Chick Magnet: Ross attracts several women during the show, including Rachel (of course!), Julie, Bonnie, Emily, Elizabeth, Mona, Charlie, Chloe and others.
Competition Freak: Not as bad as Monica, but he can still get pretty competitive at times. Judy banned them both from playing football as kids because they were so obsessed with beating each other it led to him breaking his nose. He also openly admits that he always plays to win at poker and doesn't care if that means other people have to lose.
Cosmic Plaything: Ross can't catch a break. Whenever his relationships endure the initial crush-stage and he convinces himself things are going smoothly, Rachel will interfere, or some misunderstanding happens, or his own desperation gets in the way, invariably resulting in utter heartbreak on his part. This is never seriously acknowledged, and more often than not, his friends rub it in his face afterwards, usually with all the blame too.
Crazy Jealous Guy: It's pointed out that he became this after his first divorce. Ross' jealousy becomes full-blown when Mark is introduced to Rachel, causing Ross to go to extreme lengths to show he is dating Rachel. His causing a mess at Rachel's work in an attempt to show he loves her is what causes her to take a break from him in the first place. This trait shows up again when Emily spends several days in London with Susan and he convinces himself something will happen between them.
Desperately Craves Affection: Ross' deepest flaw is his neediness. It causes him to push for closeness his parther(s) isn't ready for, not allow her time to cool off during bad arguments, and make short-sighted decisions because they give him emotional comfort in the moment- behaviours that frequently endanger his romantic relationships.
Digging Yourself Deeper: Can be just as bad as Chandler when it comes to this, especially when he tries flirting with other women. His tendency to do this gets acknowledged in "The One with the Male Nanny".
Joey: Not knowing when to shut up!
Ross: Yup. That's my thing.
Disproportionate Retribution: Ends up on the receiving end of this in "The One with the Girl Who Hits Joey" when, after refusing to pay for his new apartment handyman's retirement fund, everyone in the building gives him the cold shoulder.
Ditzy Genius: He's the smartest of the group academically, but also one of the most foolish and he lacks common sense, especially in later seasons. One example is "The One with Ross' Tan", where he tries to get a tan but he keeps getting the procedure wrong.
Monica: How could you mess this up? It's so easy? You go into the booth, you count to five and you turn around!!
Ross: How do you count to five?
Monica: One, two, three...
Ross: Damnit!
Dogged Nice Guy: Towards Rachel, in seasons 1, 4, 8 and 9. He is constantly whining about her boyfriend, who he deems inappropriate for her (Paolo), and feels entitled to her affection just because of "their history"- which started with a high school crush. Moreover, the episode where Ross and Rachel get together for the first time shows Rachel finally realizing what a great guy Ross is for waiting for this.
Dreadful Musician: With keyboard and especially bagpipes.
Fatal Flaw: His attraction to Rachel has led to the ruin of a few of his relationships such as with Julie, Emily and Mona.
Flanderization: In early seasons, Ross showed basic nerdiness, clumsiness and neurotic tendencies, but during Season 5, David Schwimmer's penchant for high-intensity comedy ("MY SANDWICH!" for example) saw these character traits turned up to eleven. From that point onwards, Ross' character became almost a parody of itself and started riding a line between being more funny but less likable.
Freudian Excuse: In season four Phoebe theorises that his Crazy Jealous Guy tendencies are the result of Carol leaving him the way she did.
Friend to All Children: Apart from being a loving father of two himself, one episode shows him going out of his way to sell a young girl scout's cookies to atone for accidentally breaking her leg by trying to make enough money for her to go to Space Camp. When that fails, he takes the little girl to Chandler and Joey's apartment after making their own little "space camp" in there to try to cheer her up. And the best part? It succeeds.
Generation Xerox: Not only does he look like his dad (thanks to David Schwimmer's uncanny resemblance to Elliot Gould), but has picked up a lot of his mannerisms. Shown off well in "The One Where Nana Dies Twice" where they're sitting in the same pose at the hospital and they stand up at the same time and in the same way.
Give Geeks a Chance: Palaeontologist Ross and the socialite Rachel are the show's lead examples, and had this dynamic going back to high school where he was the nerd and she was the Lovable Alpha Bitch, who barely noticed him. As adult, she's a spoiled, sheltered young woman who eventually goes to work in fashion and he becomes a university professor.
Good Parents: Loves Ben and Emma very much and is very involved in their lives despite not being with their mothers anymore.
Grammar Nazi: He was often this kind of Nazi or at least his irritated friends had the opinion that he was. He had a habit of correcting people when they misused "who" for "whom" and could occasionally become quite irate when confronted with bad grammar (or he would get angry about something else but still feel compelled to nitpick).
Heroic Self-Deprecation: By the middle of season five, Ross suffers from poor self-esteem; he has two divorces (later three) in a short span, he is suspended from his job and he still gets a lot of bad luck.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Chandler during their college years. By the time the shows starts, his place has been taken by Joey (though Chandler calls both of them his best friend), but it's clear they were very close early on including making life-long pacts and spending holidays together. By the end of the series, the three guys are more-or-less a Heterosexual Life-Partners unit, with Chandler in the center.
Hidden Depths:
Can turn erotic cakes into woodland creatures. Note that this was an ability he didn't know he had until he had to fix Emma's birthday cake.
Chandler infecting his laptop with a computer virus from clicking a pornographic link reveals that Ross is a genuine fan of women's tennis.
"Nude photos of Anna Kournikova? She's never even won a major tournament!"
Honor Before Reason: Ross never wants to admit he is wrong or that he did something wrong (unless an extreme circumstance forces him to). For example, when Monica threatened to expose Ross' secret to his parents about smoking pot in college, Ross kept coming up with excuses and lies on how he was tricked or how it wasn't really him that smoked. After Ross got married to Rachel while drunk, he knows that he has to get a divorce because Rachel would never agree to it. However, in order to save his pride and not get divorced for a 3rd time, he tries to convince Rachel to stay married to him and then lies about getting the marriage annulled.
Hot-Blooded: In one episode, Ross turns into "Red Ross". His hotbloodedness becomes more apparent when Rachel challenges him to poker.
Informed Judaism: Subverted during his turn as the Holiday armadillo in season 7, but otherwise there's not much indication of the Gellers' religious beliefs over the course of the show.
In-Series Nickname: Discussed several times: He likes "Ross-A-Tron" and "Red Ross" but they never catch on, "Wet Pants" Geller and "Crazy" Geller however do. He and Phoebe also debate between "Divorco" "Ross the Divorcer", and "The Divorce Force".
Insufferable Genius: He tends to be right on many subjects and he always has to prove that he is right whenever someone says something grammatically incorrect or states a wrong fact. His friends naturally get annoyed by this.
Rachel: God, I hate it when Ross is right!
Chandler: You know, I think for once Ross might actually be wrong...
Rachel: [delighted] Really?!
Chandler: Nah, he's right.
Jerkass Ball: He can be nice, but a lot of the time he can be selfish, possessive, self-centered and incredibly entitled, even in the early seasons.
Jewish and Nerdy: He's Jewish (especially seen in "The One with the Holiday Armadillo") other than being a brainy paleontologist, and the most socially awkward Friend.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: Not as bad as some other examples of this trope, but he definitely doesn't know quite as much as he thinks he does.
Large Ham: Everyone has these moments, but Ross really ran with this trope as the Holiday Armadillo.
Last Het Romance: His wife turns out to be a lesbian and leaves him for another woman, while she was pregnant with his child.
Likes Older Women: Sometimes. It's revealed he made out with a 50-year-old woman in high school.
Lost Food Grievance: MY SANDWICH?! [cue Astronomic Zoom]
Lovable Nerd: Well, in early seasons he was supposed to be a geeky romantic nice guy.
Manchild: Although he's pretty good with his job and looking after himself, and a good father to Ben, he can fall into this in some situations. In early seasons, both he and Rachel resort to petty revenge whenever they break up from their on again off again relationship. He also gets into childish fights with his sister, Monica, such as hogging the TV or calling her childish names. For the latter, he thought his squabbles with Monica as they grew up together was harmless fun and that is why he kept doing it well into adulthood until Monica confessed that she hated him when they were kids because of his bullying.
Momma's Boy: He's clearly Judy's favorite. And then there's this quote:
Chandler: I was so pissed at you that night that I wanted to get back at you. So I thought, "Who does Ross like the more than anybody?"
Ross: [thinks about it for a few seconds] What did you do to my mom?
Nerds Are Sexy: Unapologetically nerdy, with his obsession with dinosaurs, and yet not once did this take away from the fact that the Ross was a good looking man, and able to attract the likes of beauties such as Julie, Bonnie, Mona, Emily, Charlie and, of course, Rachel, and even one of his students, Elizabeth, who openly gushed about how handsome she found him.
Never My Fault:
Monica has called him out on never taking responsibility for how bad she was made to feel in childhood.
Chandler had to remind him that even though he may have thought he'd broken up with Rachel, he still slept with a girl three hours after the break and was a Crazy Jealous Guy over Mark, while Rachel points out that he would not have been quick to forgive if the situation had been reversed.
Despite his three divorces, Ross tries to argue that he is basically blameless for the failure of his then current marriage to Rachel, arguing that the state of Nevada should be blamed for making it legal for him to get married while he was that drunk (although he is willing to concede that his second marriage failing was "a little [his] fault" after he said the wrong name at the altar).
Upon discovering that Rachel is pregnant with his second child, Ross gets mad and calls the condom company for not putting the whole "only works 97% of the time" warning in huge black letters on the box, which he clearly didn't even read prior to the fling that caused said pregnancy in the first place.
Nice Guy: Ross is romantic, becomes a good father to his son Ben and his daughter Emma and manages to get on well with his ex-wife Carol.
Non-Action Guy: While he and Chandler are both considered the more pathetic members of the group, this trait is played up more with Ross. Many of his physical activities tend to end in pain, humiliation, or getting overpowered. Joey is able to push him over the couch with one hand, while Rachel and Phoebe show themselves capable of easily overpowering him.
No-Respect Guy: Despite being the most accomplished and successful member of the group, there is not a single moment in the entire series where the characters treat his (high-paying and well-respected) profession with anything other than mocking and derision. Granted, he is an Insufferable Genius about it, but the gang treats him like he unclogs toilets for a living instead of being a tenured college professor and key note speaker at conferences in his field.
Not That Kind of Doctor: Ross has a PhD in paleontology, and loves to introduce himself as Dr. Geller. When he does it at a hospital, Rachel tells him: "Ross, stop it. That actually means something here."
One-Hour Work Week: Though his profession does come into play every now and then.
Only Sane Man: He likes to think he is, being the man of science and the only one with any kind of post-college education. Whilst he's arguably this early on, as the series progresses, he becomes such a neurotic mess that he can barely live up to this trope.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The overreacting Hot-Blooded Red to Chandler's Deadpan Snarker Blue.
Screams Like a Little Girl: As close as a thirty-year-old man can do without any help. And it is brilliant.
Self-Deprecation: Even Ross starts making jokes about his three failed marriages in the later seasons.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The nerdy Sensitive Guy to Joey's macho Manly Man. Mostly seen in later seasons, after Chandler starts spending more time with Monica, often leaving Joey and Ross as a Those Two Guys duo. Inverted in "The One with the Male Nanny" where Ross hates Sandy for being In Touch with His Feminine Side, while Joey appreciates Sandy's company.
Serial Romeo: Sure, Rachel was always the one, but he falls in love with quite a few girls throughout the show.
Serial Spouse: He had three ex-wives by the end of the series and is often mocked for it (sometimes by himself).
Ross: I'm gonna go out on a limb here, but No Divorces in '99!
Monica: Aren't you still married to Emily?
Ross: Just The One Divorce in '99!
Sibling Rivalry: With Monica. They clearly love each other and will defend one another when the chips are down, but they have a pretty typical sibling rivalry. They squabble, bicker, argue, fight, and don't always get along — and compete with each other on a lot of crap, especially when it comes to their parents' approval. Ross is the golden boy to their parents while Monica isn't.
The Spock: Of the men. He's The Spock to Chandler's The Kirk and Joey's The McCoy.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: A sibling example. He is weak but the smartest of the group, while his sister Monica is stated to be "freakishly strong".
Suckiness Is Painful: He's an even worse musician than Phoebe. His "music" is a basic song played by the keyboard itself while he presses keys to make random noises (like traffic or barnyard animals) come out. He also tries to learn to play the bagpipes for Monica's and Chandler's wedding, because Chandler has some Scot heritage. Both times, only Phoebe is impressed (she even sings along with the bagpipes. "EEEEEEEEE EEEEE EEEEEEE.").
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: The tallest out of the three guys.
That Came Out Wrong: Ross was the Mayor of doing this on that show. In a late season, he's trying to convince Rachel's ex-boss to rehire her, and he learns that the man's son is into dinosaurs.
Ross: How would [your son] like to come with me to the Museum of Natural History after everyone else has left, just the two of us, and he can touch anything he wants?
Mr. Zelner: [looks horrified]
Ross: I just heard it how you must have heard it and that's not good. Let me start again. I'm a paleontologist, you'll be there with us and the touching refers only to bones — Fossils!
Took a Level in Dumbass: Ross was one of the most rational and serious members of the group in early seasons. By the end, he becomes more of a neurotic mess and a Manchild prone to overreacting, often acting foolish, making bad choices and regularly putting himself into ridiculous situations. It could be that he was Surrounded by Idiots from the start and simply became one of them.
Took a Level in Jerkass: After his breakup with Emily, he gradually becomes more egotistical and obnoxious, if only to justify his Butt-Monkey role.
Took a Level in Kindness: He was a Big Brother Bully and very mean to Monica when they were kids, but now he's mostly nice to her except for a few moments of Sibling Rivalry, and they are quite close.
Too Spicy for Yog-Sothoth: In one episode, out of depression from his breakup with Emily, he winds up dating Janice. However, his complaining winds up getting on Janice's nerves and she quickly ends things with him. The knowledge that he's managed to actually annoy her winds up cheering him up a little.
Trademark Favorite Food: While not as prominent as Joey or Monica's obsession with food, he also enjoys sandwiches. The most notable example is Monica's special Thanksgiving leftover sandwiches.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: Several times with Rachel. S1: Ross —> Rachel. S2: Rachel —> Ross then Ross —> Rachel. S3: Ross —> Rachel then Rachel —> Ross. S4/5: Rachel —> Ross. S6: Ross —> Rachel. S8/9: They swap per episode. S10: Ross —> Rachel.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With Rachel. They would resolve it once, then something will go wrong, cue angry break up, the UST will slowly build up again over time, over and over again.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: More in later seasons. Ross' characteristics of jealousy, arrogance, whininess and overall negative characteristics get played up more. At the same time, he's also the main Butt-Monkey of the group (even more than Chandler). The series pokes a lot of fun at his misfortunes, most notably being divorced three times over the course of the series.
I Was Quite a Fashion Victim: Ross' 80's curly 'fro and mustache from his school days.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Has a great fear of spiders.