Ain't No Rule: Against him joining the football team (there actually would be, but this is a comedy).
Alliterative Name: Artie Abrams.
Ambiguously Bi: Especially in Season 3. Amusingly, in "Transitioning" he dances with both Kitty and Spencer at Rachel's party.
Badass Boast: "We're planning on smacking them down like the hand of God" in "Vitamin D", and "Now get the hell out of my auditorium" in "Michael".
Beautiful All Along: As seen in episodes such as "Glee, Actually", under the glasses and grandpa sweaters he's actually quite good-looking. See also Nerds Are Sexy.
Beta Couple: Double subverted. Early on, Kevin McHale compared Artie and Tina to Corey and Topanga from Boy Meets World saying that although they have their ups and their downs they would always be together. While Artie and Tina both had several romantic interests through the course of the show, the finale ultimately saw them back together, with Tina as an actress in Artie's films and the two sharing a kiss.
Big Damn Heroes: In "Britney/Brittany", Artie parks himself between Finn and Karofsky and Azimio to stop a fight that could leave Finn both hurt and in serious trouble at school.
Brutal Honesty: "Well, you're irritating most of the time, but don't take that personally."
The Casanova: Became one after the show moved to New York, as seen in "Tested". It doesn't end well for him.
Character Tics: His "preach" hand wave.
Deadpan Snarker: He's good at delivering little snarky comments in a flat tone.
Disabled Snarker: He certainly doesn't let his disability get in the way of being able to ego-check his friends.
Dream-Crushing Handicap: Artie's initial dream of being able to walk and dance again.
Girl-on-Girl is Hot: Subverted - when Artie finds out that Brittany has been cheating on him with Santana throughout their relationship, he is genuinely bothered by it. It results in them breaking up after he, under the pressure of heartbreak, calls Brittany "stupid" for letting Santana manipulate her.
Handicapped Badass: While his disability doesn't hinder his singing talent, Artie still fits this to a T.
The Heart: As stated by Rory in Artie's It's a Wonderful Plot dream from "Glee, Actually", he is the glue that keeps the Glee club together.
Hidden Depths: A seemingly pathetic, wheelchair-bound nerd... who plays guitar, sings, dances, raps (pretty damn well too), engages in Def Poetry, is on his way to become a film director, and planned a lesbian wedding. And he still has full use of his penis.
I Can't Believe A Girl Like You Would Notice Me: Artie is very insecure about being disabled and nerdy, that he can't believe that Brittany—a very pretty, popular cheerleader—would be interested in him. A similar thing happens later with Kitty.
I Just Want to Be Normal: Part of the reason Artie is so doggone nice to everyone (to the point of becoming close friends with Mike even after the whole thing with Tina, and of planning Brittany and Santana's wedding in spite of his history with them), he has a hard enough time trying to get people to see past the chair. It's also the initial reason for his crush on Tina during freshman year, as confirmed via voiceover in "2009".
Nerds Are Sexy: Becky definitely thinks so, and isn't shy about it. And if the amount of girls he slept with is to go by, it seems she isn't the only one.
Odd Friendship: Let's just cut to the chase, him and everyone. He's like the Wolverine of Glee in that all of his friendships are a little odd, and not just because of his disability.
Only Sane Man: Among the members of the Glee club, he is often the most down to earth and by far the least dramatic. This, combined with his often subtly sarcastic dialogue, makes him the most fitting candidate among the group for the title.
Operation: Jealousy: Initially hangs around Brittany to make Tina jealous after she dumped him for Mike. They soon become an actual couple after the fact that they actually do like each other and aren't in it to make their ex-girlfriends jealous comes to light.
Pair the Spares: With both Tina and Brittany.
Poke the Poodle: Artie spikes the punch bowl at the prom... with lemonade.
Pretty Fly for a White Guy:
Averted in that he actually is pretty fly, casually throwing around "ghetto" slang and being one of New Directions' go-to guys for rapping, and managing to pull it off. Most notably, in Season 1 alone, his performance of "U Can't Touch This" is possibly better than Hammer's, and in "Throwdown", as the minority students are leaving the room after a whole group performance, one can easily recognize his voice saying "Bye, white people!"
It's revealed in "2009" that he auditioned for New Directions with "Pony". Yes, that "Pony". And he does it pretty damn well, too.
Artie: Ginuwine's a badass.
Put on a Bus: Ends his tenure at the end of season five.
The Rival: Played for Laughs, but just see the interaction between Sebastian and Artie in "Michael", especially in "Bad" and later in "Black or White". It reeks of two rival gang leaders trying to best each other. Unsurprisingly, due to the actors' real life friendship, quite a few fans saw this in a different light.
Serenade Your Lover:
Does this twice to Brittany in season 2. First, in "Silly Love Songs", he serenades her with Michael Jackson's "P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)" as part of the Valentine's Day assignment. Later, in "Prom Queen", after their break-up, he brings the rest of the straight guys in New Directions to her home economics class and sings Stevie Wonder's "Isn't She Lovely" to her. (The Cover Changes the Meaning is in play, of course, and Mercedes is quick to point it out.)
He does this again in the season 3 episode "Heart", this time singing Mario's "Let Me Love You" (in a particularly Boy Band-esque fashion, too) to Sugar, in order to best Rory at being her Valentine. It initially works, but she ultimately chooses Rory after he lies about being deported back to Ireland.
Ship Tease: With Sugar in seasons 3 and 4, as well as Kitty in the latter. In Kitty's case, it actually ended up going somewhere in season 5 before his inevitable graduation and move to New York led them to break up.
Stuffed into a Locker: Er... port-a-potty.
Token Minority Couple: With Tina in Season 1, and with Betty in "I Do".
Took a Level in Jerkass: In Season 3 being a director goes seriously to his head. He gets better though.
What the Hell, Hero?:
Artie to Tina, after Tina reveals she faked her stutter. He gets his own when he calls Brittany stupid. Before that, he was the only one in the school who hadn't.
He does it again in season 3, twice in a row: in "Yes/No" towards the rest of the club due to their prejudice against Becky, and in "Michael" towards Will, protesting against the bullying the Glee club (him moreso than the rest) has to go through without fighting back. In the latter's case, it leads to a full-on Imagine Spot dance number with Mike, a remake of the video for "Scream", complete with the form-fitting wardrobe and leather pants.
He gets one from Kitty in Season 6, when he comes to ask her to rejoin the Glee club. She's quite understandably pissed off that he broke up with her after graduation, so she isn't interested in what he has to say. After Rachel finally convinces Kitty to rejoin, though, she and Artie seem to have made amends.