Anatomically Impossible Sex: Claimed she must be pregnant because a stork was building a nest near her home. Also, her attempts at scissoring over Skype.
The Beard: Kurt dated her in his attempt to appear more straight. She didn't seem to mind.
Berserk Button: Double subverted. She will react to being called stupid very graciously, but do not expect to be on her good side afterwards (as Artie and Finn find out).
Betty and Veronica: She was the Betty to Puck's Veronica in their triangle with Santana.
She's become the Veronica to Tina's Betty in their triangle with Artie.
To bring things full circle, she was the Archie in a triangle with Artie and Santana. Also Archie to Sam/Santana.
Black Comedy Rape: Her remark that she lost her virginity at a cheerleading camp due to "an alien visiting [her] tent" indicates that she at least fell prey to a Bed Trick, and it's played for the "Brittany's talking absurd nonsense again" humor rather than for drama. Although there still is a possibility that her story had nothing in common with reality, like several of the things she's said over the course of the series.
Book Dumb: She's not very intelligent, but is fairly savant with social and emotional situations. She can usually interpret what a person is really feeling and can easily make friends.
Brainless Beauty: Exceedingly so.
Mr. Schue: Can anyone tell me what a ballad is?
Brittany: A male duck.
In her defense, few people know what a mallard even is. She was close, at least.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: She may be dumber than a jar of mayonnaise, but Brittany is one of the two best dancers in the group (the other being Mike), performing complex moves you wouldn't expect from a girl who sometimes forgets her middle name. The real reason is because Heather Morris is a professional dancer in real life who has toured with Beyoncé. She was brought on the show to teach the "Single Ladies" choreography, but was kept on since a third cheerleader was wanted.
The Bus Came Back: Returns for the 100th episode and seems to be heading to New York after accepting an offer from Santana to go there when they finish on their vacation, reconciling in the process. She made an appearance in the Season 5 finale; her and Santana returned for seven episodes in the final season, then appeared for the final number of the series in the Grand Finale.
But Not Too Bi: She's bisexual, but the show went a long time before her to kiss her girlfriend, even though she's made out frequently with the boys she's dated. See above "But Not Too Gay" example under Santana for more details.
Can Count to Potato: "[she] thinks the square root of four is rainbows" and stopped learning the alphabet when she kept mixing up M and N. She still gets accepted to MIT eventually because, at the end of the day, she gets to the same conclusions as everybody else, she just takes VERY different roads to get there.
Can't Catch Up: Because of her name, she feels like she has always lived in Britney Spears's shadow, stating that she will never be as talented as she.
Characterization Marches On: In her first few appearances, her handful of lines and her facial expressions don't suggest she's any different from Quinn and Santana. Gradually, her famously stupid persona emerged.
Closet Geek: Arguably this, because of her popular internet vlog/talk show, despite being ditzy in real life.
Closet Key: To Santana.
Cloud Cuckoo Lander
Cuckoosnarker: Tends to be this sometimes.
The Cutie: Her childish naivety and sweetness is an ungodly cute combination.
Depending on the Writer: Brittany's stupidity depends on the writers. There are episodes where she is a bit ditzy, if maybe just a bit out there and then there are episodes when her stupidity is hyped up to near impossible levels that makes you question how she even functions everyday life.
The Ditz: Brittany can out-ditz anyone on this show.
Kurt: Everyone raise your right hand. (Brittany raises her left hand) Your right hand, Brittany.
Santana: ...That's this one, Brittany.
Also:
Coach Sylvester: Anything else you want to tell me?
Brittany: Sometimes I forget my middle name.
Does Not Like Men: In "Asian F", she proves to be a closed-minded misandrist since she claims Kurt shouldn't run for class president just because he's male. But then again, she's just a teenager so she's still naive and has underdeveloped social skills.
Dumb Blonde: In one of Kurt's voice-overs in Episode 10, he tells us that Brittany thinks the square root of 4 is "rainbows."
It's revealed in the Christmas special that she still believes in Santa Claus and, when taken to a Mall Santa wishes for Artie to be able to walk note 
Ramped up in Season 4, as when Santana dumped her out of the blue, her ditziness kicked up tenfold, the implication being that the break up broke her to the point of having her more ditzy traits become more pronounced. Even when she was admitted to MIT on a fluke, she still showed these traits. Season 5 reunited her and Santana, and she reverted back to her previous characterization.
Dumb Is Good: Brittany's extreme stupidity isn't idealized or generally presented positively, but her ability to quickly befriend just about anyone (in contrast to fellow Cheerios Quinn and Santana) is because she's too stupid to be mean most of the time.
Expy: Heather Morris has said she always imagined the character as being akin to Amanda Seyfried's Karen in Mean Girls.
Face–Heel Turn: In "Pot O' Gold", she leaves New Directions for the Trouble-tones.
Fake Guest Star: In season one, despite being present in every episode but the first, Heather Morris receives guest star billing
Fetish: Apparently, the taste of her own armpits turns her on.
She also apparently misses the smell of Santana's when they end their relationship.
Food as Bribe: Artie, Mike, and Tina got Brittany to join the brainiacs because they bribed her with Dots. They didn't regret it.
Fourth-Wall Observer: Implied in "Britney 2.0", after Blaine catches her talking to herself.
Blaine: Brittany...who are you talking to?
Brittany: I thought I was doing a voiceover.
And again in "Sadie Hawkins", when she says music usually starts when she turns around or says "It's Brittany, bitch."
Friendship Trinket: Her and Santana can be seen in multiple episodes each wearing a friendship bracelet.
Full-Name Basis: She's usually referred to as Brittany S. Pierce rather than Brittany Pierce.
Genius Ditz: She knows a lot about cat diseases, surprisingly. And politics. In the season four finale, she is accepted to MIT to study mathematics, based on the "Brittany Code."
She also has a creative internal logic in even her ditzy moments. At one point, when asked what the capital of Ohio is, Brittany confidently answers "O." Technically "O" is the capital of Ohio....that is, the capital letter in the word "Ohio."
Girl Posse: For Quinn, initially; after Quinn is dethroned as head cheerleader, she and Santana become more of a double-act.
Good Bad Girl: She Really Gets Around just as much Santana, but unlike Santana she's mostly a sweet and kind girl.
Good with Numbers: Brittany makes a mathematical breakthrough (albeit accidentally) and gets an early admission offer to MIT.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: Played straight for the most part as she is generally much sweeter, innocent and goofier than the other cheerleaders but at times, she can have moments where she can be rather mean.
Heroic BSoD: In "Britney 2.0", due to Santana leaving for Louisville, Brittany follows Britney's example and has a complete breakdown: feasting on junk food, beating up the paparazzi, trying to shave her head, and lip synching. Invoked, however. She planned on hitting rock bottom so that she can make an even more glorious comeback.
She also had apparently gotten caught up in Lord Tubbington's Ponzi scheme over the summer.
Hidden Depths: A brainless cheerleader...who is friends with people far less popular than her. She also has outstanding knowledge of cats and cat diseases, shown in "A Night of Neglect."
In the third season she begins to show more independence and common sense. And, of course, her math genius as of the season 4 finale.
Hollywood Tone-Deaf: When she tries to do runs in "Duets."
Huge Schoolgirl: One of the tallest girls in the group at 5'8.
Hypocrite: She claims men are stupid in "Asian F". By the way, don't look at her GPA listed below.
Idiot Savant: Despite having a 0.0 GPA throughout the first three seasons (and only raising it by 0.2 by the end of the fourth), she manages to get a perfect score on her SATs. This grabs the attention of MIT, who decide to give her another test since they are rightfully suspicious. She fails horribly, but does write down a series of numbers that end up being incredibly important and allow her a full scholarship to the school.
I Just Want to Be Loved: She seems genuinely depressed after she is rebuffed by both Santana and Artie.
Incompatible Orientation: Brittany and Kurt.
Ineffectual Sympathetic Villain: When she tries to secretly tape Glee club rehearsals for Sue.
Mr. Schue: What are you doing?
Brittany: Coach Sylvester...didn't tell me to do this.
Informed Flaw: In "Britney/Brittany," they reveal that she doesn't brush her teeth and washes her mouth with soda, having the cavities to match. Of course, her teeth appear as perfect as everyone else's in the show.
Innocent Beta Bitch: Was part of Quinn's Girl Posse in season 1, along with fellow cheerleader Santana. From season 2 onwards, Brittany is portrayed as a ditzy but sweet and friendly girl, but she still hangs out with Santana, who turns out to be an even bigger Alpha Bitch than Quinn (though sometimes with a soft side).
Intertwined Fingers: Brittany and Santana's signature pinkie (finger) link.
Kindhearted Cat Lover: She's typically very sweet, she has a vast knowledge of all things cat-related, and at least two cats.
Kindhearted Simpleton: What she lacks in brains, she makes it up in beauty and heart.
Ladykiller in Love: In "Duets", Artie breaks off his pairing with Brittany when he thinks she seduced him just so he would sing with her. Turns out her affection was genuine after all.
Launcher of a Thousand Ships: In-universe. She once stated she has made out with everyone in school...which means she's probably at least kissed every member of the Glee Club.
Lethal Chef: Everyone who has tasted it complains the titled fondue on her internet talk show is horrible.
Letting Her Hair Down: After she quits the Cheerios, her hair is perpetually down.
Light Feminine and Dark Feminine: The Light to Santana's Dark.
Limited Wardrobe: Her cheerleading uniform. Apart from when everyone is wearing performance costumes, the only time we've seen her out of her cheerleading uniform is once on a date with Kurt. Until she quits in "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle."
She appears in Artie's "Safety Dance" flash mob wearing a tank top, shorts, and tights. But seeing as this is a fantasy it may not count.
She gets a number of Britney Spears outfits in "Britney/Brittany".
Lingerie Scene: When she got drunk with the glee club, she ripped off her shirt and ran around the room in her bra, dancing like a stripper for Artie. We later see it abandoned at Rachel's house during the post party clean up suggesting it didn't stay on for long.
Lipstick Lesbian: Or more technically, a "Lipstick Bisexual". She is attracted to both men and women, but is also just girly.
Mistaken for Cheating: With Mike in "Special Education". Ironically, she actually was cheating on Artie around that time, but not with Mike.
The Mole: But not a very good one.
Brittany: Coach Sylvester didn't tell me to do this.
Morality Pet: For Santana.
Ms. Fanservice
Nice Girl: By far the sweetest member of New Directions.
Odd Friendship: Santana, a self-identified "bitch" with a perpetually sour outlook, would on the surface seem to be the least likely companion for the generally sweet, goofy Brittany, but the two are virtually inseparable.
Only One Name: In the first season, her lack of a last name was a Running Gag, to the point that she is only referred to by her first name in the yearbook. However, it was finally revealed in episode 2.02, and it's Pierce, which she is embarrassed by. Her middle name is Susan. Which makes her Brittany S. Pierce. She thus goes from the only member not to have their last name mentioned to the first to have her middle name mentioned.
Operation: Jealousy: She initially dates Artie to try and make Santana jealous.
Opposites Attract: With Santana.
Paper-Thin Disguise: When the kids get a substitute teacher and switch names to mess with her, Brittany claims to be Mike Chang. There are at least two problems with that.
People's Republic of Tyranny: At the start of "Britney 2.0", she reveals via "voice over" that she's secretly plotting a "...Middle Eastern style sham election to make me Class President for life."
Pet the Dog: Her friendship with Becky.
Popular Is Dumb
Put on a Bus: At the end of season four she leaves high school to enroll at MIT early. Most of the finale is dedicated to her saying goodbye to the club.
Real Life Writes the Plot: Heather Morris left the series at the end of Season 4 to have a baby.
Really Gets Around: Not as much as, say, Santana, but she hasn't made out with nearly everybody in school for nothing. The Oh, Crap! face when Holly tells the kids that when they have sex with somebody, they have sex with everybody they've had sex with is hilarious.
Relationship Reveal: "Brittana" went from being a non-canon ship to a sly joke to something we actually see onscreen to an essential part of Santana's coming-out story-line, eventually culminating with their wedding.
Shout-Out: Her name can be read as Brittany S. Pierce.
Small Name, Big Ego: After deciding that she was a better performer than Britney Spears in her hallucinations, she demands every solo in the club. This is taken with a grain of salt.
Still Believes in Santa: Brittany is the show's resident ditz, and asks Artie with utmost seriousness what he asked for from Santa during one of the Christmas episodes.
Student Council President
Suspiciously Specific Denial: In "Hairography", when caught filming the rehearsal:
Brittany: Coach Sylvester didn't tell me to do this.
Token Good Teammate: Brittany is the nicest of her friends, and her unkind moments are much fewer and further between than Santana's outright bullying, or Quinn's frequent moments of meanness and unscrupulousness. The fact that Brittany seems so unassuming and sweet definitely helps.
Too Dumb to Live: Gave herself temporary brain damage/memory loss from taking "all [her] antibiotics at the same time".
Brittany: I don't remember how to leave.
She also washes her mouth with soda instead of brushing her teeth, although it doesn't show.
She's also apparently gone skiing without skis.
And, of course...
Brittany: I don't know how to turn on a computer.
Womanchild: She still believes in Santa Claus, she has a dollhouse, and at Christmas she wears her hair like Cindy Lou Who.
You Are the New Trend: As of the episode "Comeback", where her popularity leads to her style being mass copied by most if not almost all the girls at school. Rachel attempts to utilize this for her own advantage, but it backfires.