Abusive Parents: Her parents used to tie her thumbs together to stop her from cleaning everything. She chewed through the twine. "It was so cute!" And rather than being remotely understanding about her mental illness, they pick on her and belittle her over it. "Is that my little Freaky Deaky?"
Betty and Veronica: The Betty to Terri’s Veronica.
Beware the Nice Ones: After learning from Sue about Will's escapades throughout the second half of season 1, she's beyond furious. She's even more furious after New Directions loses Regionals (supposedly due to Sue's machinations) and Principal Figgins wastes no time in canceling the club in "Journey".
Blonde, Brunette, Redhead: The Redhead of the trio.
Break the Cutie: A lot of moments, but probably the worst was when Terri tells Emma that she will never have a chance with Will and she may as accept her consolation prize and marry Ken.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Mostly averted, Emma often gives and takes on board bad advice, struggles to give anybody guidance with sex issues, though later episodes show that she can be a capable counselor when necessary, like when she was talking with Artie in "Dream On". Whenever she makes Will listen to reason, she generally shows herself to be thoughtful and extremely observant.
Cloudcuckoolander: Emma is kind of spacey, but that adds to her charm.
Color-Coded for Your Convenience: Emma is often shown in yellow clothing. This can be both symbolic of her general positivity, hopefulness, and intelligence. It can also reflect her timid and somewhat cowardly tendencies.
Crazy-Prepared: She has pamphlets for everything.
The Cutie: Her sweet voice, red hair and kindness make her comes across as incredibly cute.
Deadpan Snarker: Only to Sue. The moments where Emma stops being a frightened little Woobie and delivers a perfect one-liner are some of the funniest moments in the show.
(Sue walks in with dark eye makeup)
Emma: Sue! Did someone finally punch you? (flawless smile)
Not only to Sue, though
Rachel: I guess I just don't have a gag reflex.
Emma: When you're older, that will turn out to be a gift.
Did I Just Say That Out Loud?: Emma to Will.
Freudian Excuse: One episode implies that at least part of the reason for her germophobia results from her ginger-supremacist parents making her clean glasses and silverware touched by a non-ginger server at a restaurant.
Hates Being Touched: The reason she's a virgin. Over the course of the series she slowly gets better, culminating in her and Will sleeping together in "Nationals".
Heroic BSoD: In "Diva" she has a panic attack about planning for the wedding, and starts completely trashing her office until Finn Shut up kisses her.
Important Haircut: Not so much a haircut as a style-change. In "Special Education", her hair is not as perky as it is in the previous episodes. This reflects how Carl is making her less obsessive about her life. She did get an actual haircut earlier in the season - also designed to show how dating Carl is getting her to break out of her shell.
Love Hurts: Episode 2 showed Emma sitting in her car, in the rain, and crying while listening to sad music because she has such a crush on Will.
The Maiden Name Debate: When Emma gets engaged to Ken, she specifically tells him that she's going to keep her name. Later on, one of the ways that it is made clear to the audience that Emma has indeed married Carl is a shot of her old name plate reading "Ms. Emma Pillsbury" being replaced with a new one that reads "Ms. Emma Pillsbury-Howell".
Motor Mouth: Pulls one during the song "(Not) Getting Married Today". Jayma Mays, that was awesome.
Nature Abhors a Virgin: In "Hell-O", Emma confesses to Will that she's a virgin. If her insecurity about her virginity is any indication, then this is the direction her character will go.
Neat Freak: It results from her phobia of germs.
Nice Girl: Very sweet and caring, for all her crazy. In fact, her crazy is part of her sweetness.
Terrified of Germs: To the point of sanitizing everything around her and taking several decontamination showers at time.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: Girly Girl to Sue's Tomboy.
Visual Innuendo: Emma singing about how she could have "done a thousand things I've never done before" combined with a close-up of a pearl necklace?
What the Hell, Hero?: Emma to Will when he gets upset about her and Ken's wedding being scheduled for the same day as Sectionals, not only assuming that Ken did this on purpose but also that Sectionals is more important than their wedding. And delivers another one when Sue tells her about Will and Shelby/Will and April.