Achilles in His Tent: Finn temporarily pulls this on "Sectionals" after learning that the father of Quinn’s baby is really Puck.
Anyone Can Die: "The Quarterback" reveals that he died of an unknown cause. Justified, since his actor, Cory Monteith, had died three months before the episode aired.
Bash Brothers: In Funk, he and Puck know immediately they'll team up to get revenge on Vocal adrenaline.
Be Careful What You Wish For: After being replaced as quarterback by Sam, he is spiteful and wishes he was the quarterback instead. Sam then dislocates his shoulder in a game, forcing Finn to play quarterback.
Betty and Veronica: With Rachel as Archie, he is Betty, whilst Puck, Jesse, and Brody are all Veronica in turn.
Beware the Nice Ones: While generally a nice guy, Finn defined the term "hair trigger temper", perpetrating increasingly serious violent acts - from a couple of brawls with Puck in Season One, to attacking Jesse for daring to dance with Rachel (whom Finn was not dating at the time) in Season Two, to attempting to physically tip Quinn out of her wheelchair when her spinal injury was still only partially healed as punishment for lying to him about it in Season Three, to his premeditated, brutal and apparently enjoyed assault on Brody, at Santana's behest in Season 4. When he's frustrated or angry past a certain point, Finn seems to reach for violence as a method of expressing or relieving his feelings.
Big Brother Mentor: To the season 4 newbies, where he helps mentor them through to Regionals.
Big Damn Heroes: In "Sectionals", where he shows up in the nick of time to save the New Directions, by preparing new songs.
Big Man on Campus: Prior to his joining of Glee, he was the starting quarterback and most popular guy in school.
Book Dumb: Finn is such a moron, but, damn it, he's so well-intentioned and nice.
As an example, he believes that the moon and New York City are "like a hundred miles apart."
Monteith once stated that "Finn is about as smart as rocks."
Broken Pedestal: "Yes/No" absolutely shatters his perceptions of his father, after finding out that he died as a drug addict.
Bus Crash: He was written out during Season Four to accommodate his actor's stint in rehab, but tragically his actor passed away before production on Season Five began. How Finn died in-show is never addressed.
Chick Magnet: Girls tend to be very interested in Finn, as a result of being starting quarterback. Taken up to eleven in "Silly Love Songs" when every girl in the school comes through the kissing booth.
Cloud Cuckoo Lander: Not as bad as Brittany, but it seems his default expression is a blank stare.
Coming of Age Story: Much of Finn's role in the plot shows him gradually growing from a naive teenager into a confident adult. Although he never came to terms with intelligence though.
Concert Kiss: After "Pretending" in "New York" with Rachel, complete with Held Gaze. Subverted in that the audience isn't too pleased and barely claps, and Jesse, Blaine, and Santana all think that it was unprofessional and cost them a place at Nationals.
Confused Eyebrow: He raises an eyebrow in confusion on things he doesn't understand. Which is often.
Disappeared Dad: His father was killed in the Gulf War when he was a baby, meaning he never knew him at all, hence why he bonded with Burt so readily. Or at least, that's what Carole tells him...
The Ditz: Common sense isn't one of his high points. Plus, he has a VERY limited vocabulary, although he makes up for it with more emotional savvy than you'd expect from a teenage boy.
Still believing that he got Quinn pregnant without intercourse and his apparently genuine belief that the other athletes are going to give him and Quinn slushies rather than throwing them at the pair.
What about singing "You're Having my Baby" to Quinn's parents, knowing that she didn't want them to know she was pregnant?
One word: Drizzle.
Claims he wasn't at football practice because he had to take care of his mother after her prostate surgery.
Believed Jesus was speaking to him through a grilled cheese sandwich, prayed to it, and got all butthurt when Emma pointed out how silly that was.
Walking through the School's Hallway in nothing but his underwear to get over his self-confidence issues.
His response to a blind item in the newspaper reading "Which prom queen candidate has been spending a lot of time in the closet lately?" is "That's ridiculous, Quinn's claustrophobic."
Prior to "Preggers", didn't know you could borrow books from the library.
Dumb Jock: He's starting quarterback and not very smart.
Easily Forgiven: For leading Rachel on to get her to rejoin the club. He got a What the Hell, Hero? for it, but it was quickly forgotten. Also, his earlier involvement in bullying Kurt. Not to mention how he cheated on Rachel with Quinn - but even when he was explicitly with Quinn, Rachel still wanted to be with him. Also, outing Santana - she slapped him for it, but in the next episode Will called it "unprovoked", and Santana hugged Finn when he sang her a song.
Fake Virgin: Finn claims he's a virgin when he has sex with Rachel for the first time, but in reality, he and Santana had sex in an earlier episode.
Follow in My Footsteps: In "Yes/No", he tells Will that he wants to join the army so he could be a good man like his father was. This backfires spectacularly.
Freudian Excuse: He's the most popular guy in high school, but knows that he doesn't have any substantial plans or opportunities for the future, something that leads him to becoming quite moody and also quite possessive of Rachel.
Gentle Giant: Depends on the definition of the word "gentle".
Girl-on-Girl is Hot: The reason Finn wanted to go on a date with both Santana and Brittany in "Hell-O". Rachel raked him across the coals for it, as only she could.
Green-Eyed Monster: Probably the reason he picked a fight with Jesse at prom when the latter was getting cozy with Rachel.
Heroic BSoD:
Finn has one of these when it's revealed to the entire school that Quinn is preggers, and blows straight out the other side when it's revealed that it's Puck's kid.
He has another one in "The First Time" after the recruiter from Ohio State basically tells him his football career will end in high school.
And another one in "Yes/No" when he finds out his father didn't die a war hero in Iraq, but a drug addict in Cincinnati.
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: Finn's the Huge Guy to Rachel's Tiny Girl; a whole foot separates them.
Hypocrite:
Cheating is not okay if it's on him, but if it's with him or he's the one doing the cheating, by all means, go ahead. To elaborate: he cheated on Quinn by kissing Rachel and having an emotional affair with her, but it was somehow understandably out-shadowed by the fact that Quinn cheated on Finn by having sex with Puck, got pregnant and tried to trick Finn into thinking that the child was his. Then Rachel cheated on Finn with Puck (kissing) and Finn didn't forgive her and made her feel horrible about it, pointing that among other things it made him reminiscent the situation with Quinn. Fair enough, but who does he hook up with after breaking up with Rachel? Quinn. Also, Quinn was with Sam at the time, but Finn explicitly declared that he couldn't be bothered by this when his happiness is on stake. It's basically like one long cheat-ception.
He was also repulsed when Rachel used him, Jesse and Puck to boost up her image, but not long before he was willing to harass his friends for the Glee club in order to maintain his social position, and frequently expressed the opinion that there's nothing wrong with aiming to be popular.
I Can't Dance and Sucks at Dancing: Finn will happily admit he is not the best dancer, laughs at the jokes about it, and even chooses his Born This Way shirt to be "Can't Dance". Still, though, he doesn't believe he's that bad, though from his friends' reactions they certainly have little faith.
Informed Ability: While Finn's singing is decent, he has the weakest and most amateur voice of the male cast. This fits with his character, who is completely new to performing, but the script has the others treating him as if he's a better singer than all the other guys, most of whom are much more polished. Lately, though, it has been acknowledged In-Universe multiple times that he is not as good a performer as the rest of the club, something he's very aware of. Finn is, however, a good drummer and rather good at rapping, so he's not totally musically inept.
Intoxication Ensues: The entire Glee Club does this to an extent while on Sudafed, but Finn is the most prominent.
It's All About Me: He may not be as...vocal about it as Rachel, but Finn definitely has some of this going on. He gets stroppy when his sense of entitlement isn't indulged, rarely does anything for someone else unless it benefits him in some way too, and has serious trouble processing the fact that other people can have lives that don't revolve around him and agendas that don't put him first.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: Breaks up with Rachel in "Goodbye", telling her that she can't let herself be held back trying to help him and Kurt achieve their dreams while delaying her own and making her get on a train to New York.
Kick the Dog: Although he had his reasons for being angry, calling Kurt faggy was still out of line.
Though Santana was definitely asking for some form of retribution, outing her in the school hallway is definitely not going to help Finn with his reputation of being a homophobe.
As of season 4, Finn begins to give a "Reason You Suck" Speech to Sue... And calls her baby "retarded" by the same occasion. He immediately backpedals and apologizes, but the harm is done.
The Lancer/Number Two: To Will in season 4.
Lousy Lovers Are Losers: Finn has a big problem with premature ejaculation even before he starts having sex, having climaxed with Quinn while sharing a hot tub and with Rachel via a simple kiss. When he does have sex with Santana, it turns out to be an awful experience for her, to the point that in "The First Time" she feels obligated to 'warn' Rachel about how bad Finn is in the sack before Rachel sleeps with him.
Santana: Speaking from experience, Finn is terrible in bed. If Rachel wants to have my sloppy seconds, she should know what she's getting into. It was like being smothered by a sweaty out-of-breath sack of potatoes that someone soaked in body spray.
Lovable Jock: He's the quarterback, and very sweet, well-intentioned and lovably stupid, and most of the club considers him a friend.
Miss Conception: Finn believes until "Sectionals" that he is the father of Quinn’s baby even though he has never slept with her. Why does he believe this? Because in on one of his romantic encounters with Quinn, he prematurely ejaculated into a hot tub they were both in (and both wearing bathing suits).
Mr. Fanservice: Let's see, he's tall, athletic, mostly kind-hearted, endearingly dumb, can sing? Oh yeah. Not to mention the fact that he has at least two shirtless scenes in the show; one in the shower and one where he's wearing nothing but boxers and a pair of glasses.
Nature Adores a Virgin: Semi-used in Power of Madonna. Following Sue's advice to start dating a younger man, Santana goes after Finn who is three days younger than her; she decides to take his virginity on Brittany's advice.
Nice Guy: Surprisingly, Finn is exceptionally kind despite having stereotypical jock written all over him at first glance.
Offhand Backhand: To Rachel in "Born This Way", somehow breaking her nose.
Operation: Jealousy: Finn said yes to having sex with Santana in Power of Madonna not only because he's still a virgin, but also because he thought it would make Rachel jealous.
Popular Is Dumb: The most popular guy in the school, but definitely not the brightest bulb.
Puppy-Dog Eyes: Probably the reason it's hard to stay mad at his character even when he's clearly being an asshole.
Put on a Bus: Was written out three episodes before the end of Season 4. The plan was for Cory to enter rehab, then return. Sadly...
The Quarterback: Literally known as Finn "The Quarterback" Hudson. He is the well-respected QB, who has the loyalty of his team enough to get them to join the glee club, and with the help of Sam, Santana, and Beiste reforms them to not bully people. He was also decent enough in the beginning to not actually partake in the terrorizing of students that his teammates did, and lets them prepare for the standard bullying he approves of. Confident and truthful enough to dump his Alpha Bitch cheerleader girlfriend for one of the school "losers", and after a couple of seasons manages to regain his status. Rallies the football team, the glee club, and the school.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech:
Gets one from Santana with her attempt at an apology. He fires right back though and subsequently outs her to the public.
He gives one to Sue in season 4... And gets a little carried away: He begins to point that Sue was kind of an underdog too, having a sister with down syndrome, and subsequently adds that she now also has a retarded baby. Everyone in the room freeze, including Finn as he realizes the sheer cruelty and stupidity of what he said, and he immediately apologizes, saying that it was the wrong word, but it's too late.
Rousing Speech: In "Sectionals". After New Directions has just learned that their songs have been stolen by their rivals, Finn states that even thought they might have been unprepared for this, what they have going for their side is that they believe in themselves.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!: Once when Ken Tanaka makes him, Puck, Mike, and Matt choose between glee club and football, and then when he finds out that Puck is the father of Quinn's baby.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Finn’s the Sensitive Guy to Puck’s Manly Man, as he does at least make an effort to treat women well, and is pretty in touch with his emotions. Oddly enough he's also the Manly Man to Kurt's Sensitive Guy, as Finn is very traditionally masculine, to Kurt's Camp Gay.
Sex as Rite-of-Passage: Skewered. He decides to lose his virginity to Santana in a ploy to make Rachel jealous and because she says he needs to, but he regrets it and admits it was a huge mistake.
Ship Sinking: As of "The Break-Up". The episode after the next one, "Glease", had the writers tease us a little before deciding to completely torpedo Finchel, other than a one night stand at Will's aborted wedding, they never did reunite. There was a tease of them getting back together, and the original Grand Finale would've had them get back together, but sadly, real life rewrote the rest of the series.
"Shut Up" Kiss: In "Diva", Emma's panicking, and Finn does the only thing he could think of to calm her down—kissing her.
Standardized Leader: He was the only non-minority male member of the New Directions before the New Transfer Student Sam joined. And Sam was in some ways (his introduction and treatment after Finn died) treated like a second Finn.
Sympathetic Adulterer: Before Quinn was revealed to be pregnant with Puck's child and claiming it was Finn's, Finn kissed Rachel (and vice versa after Quinn's confession). Granted, Quinn got a lot more criticism (both in-verse and and in the fandom) than Finn. Slightly justified in that Quinn having sex with Puck while dating Finn is worse than Finn just kissing Rachel while dating Quinn, but Finn did cheat on his girlfriend as well.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: Finn's extremely tall, pretty cute, and he has dark hair and eyes (although he's reasonably pale).
Turn to Religion: Played for Laughs in "Grilled Cheesus", when Finn discovers an image of Christ burnt into his grilled cheese sandwich and becomes a Christian (or, rather, the kind of Christian he knows all too well). This newfound religiosity doesn't last.
Un-person: Wasn't mentioned at all between the last three episodes of Season 4 and the third episode of Season 5. After that, there were occasional mentions, usually in a melancholy context.
The Un-Reveal: How he died is never mentioned, though popular Fanon says it was a car accident with him drunk at the wheel.
Verbal Tic:
Finn frequently adds "you know?" at the end of his sentences.
He also compulsively calls people "dude", which bites him in the ass when he uses it with Coach Beiste...
Vocal Evolution: At first one of, if not the, weakest singers in the cast, he steadily got better. Compare "Don't Stop Believing" from the Pilot to "We've Got Tonight" from Season 4.
What the Hell, Hero?:
In "Theatricality", Burt Hummel delivers a much-needed verbal smackdown to Finn after he overhears Finn calling Kurt "faggy". Granted, Kurt wouldn't stop trying to seduce him and never accepted that Finn wasn't interested, but it was still a dickish move on Finn's part.
Gets another one in "Furt" when he doesn't stand up to Karofsky for Kurt.
In "The First Time", he cooks Rachel meat after knowing that she's been a vegan for at least three years, also makes her cake, most likely with eggs in it. Doesn't fess up when Rachel remarks that the meat "substitute" tastes like real meat.
In "Mash Off" He tells Santana to come out of the closet in the middle of the hallway which is overheard by a congressional candidate's niece and leads to her being outed to the whole state in smear campaign against Sue.
In an argument between him and Sue mirroring that of his argument with Santana the season before, the confrontation comes to an end when he throws the statement that Sue "had a retarded baby" in her face. He instantly regrets this one, though.