Accidental Athlete: Kurt turns out to be a surprisingly good kicker for the football team as long as he does the "Single Ladies" dance beforehand.
All Gays Love Theater: Kurt is very openly gay, and like Rachel, he aspires towards Broadway.
All the Other Reindeer: In his own words, he's the only openly gay kid in his school. It comes with the territory.
Always Second Best: Especially in Season 3. He doesn't get the role of Tony in the school's production of West Side Story, losing out to Blaine, he doesn't become Class President, losing to Brittany of all people, he doesn't get any solos at Nationals, being continuously overlooked by Will, he doesn't get in to NYADA, losing out to Rachel (who choked on her audition)...
Kurt: And I lost. I lost the election, I lost the lead in West Side Story, I can forget about New York and NYADA...
Awesome Moment of Crowning: Double subverted when it is revealed that he's been elected Prom Queen. It starts out as heartwrenching, but then moves back into awesome territory after he accepts it with pride.
Kurt: Eat your heart out, Kate Middleton.
Because You Were Nice to Me: Essentially what sparked Kurt's attraction to Finn. Sure, he didn't do much about anything after that, but one time, Finn reprimanded Puck for pushing Kurt.
Berserk Button: It took a lot for Kurt to get enraged at the bullying he was receiving. On the other hand he flies into an instant fury when his friends (Tina, then Blaine) are abused.
Beta Couple: He and Blaine are significantly more stable than the other major couple, Finn and Rachel.
The Big Damn Kiss: With Blaine. It's definitely treated like one in real life, and for good reason.
Body Motifs: Hands are given repeated emphasis in Kurt's storylines, from wanting to hold his father's hand when he's comatose from a heart attack to considering the touch of fingertips the height of intimacy to the numerous close-up shots of him and Blaine holding hands post-Relationship Upgrade.
Breakout Character: He got much more screen time in the "back nine" after the showrunners saw fan reactions to his character and has taken a starring role in season 2.
Brutal Honesty: Seems the only mode of communication he's comfortable with. Also why he gets some of the best lines.
BSoD Song: "Rose's Turn".
Camp Gay: He gets Finn to let him remove his expensive jacket before getting thrown in a dumpster, chooses "Mister Cellophane" as his audition song, creates a costume inspired by Lady Gaga with plato heels before performing "Bad Romance", talked of only gay issues and icons once during dinner with Mercedes... he fits the stereotype so well that Burt points out "[he's] not like Rock Hudson gay, [he's] really gay. [He] sing[s] like Diana Ross, and [he] dress[es] like [he] own[s] a magic chocolate factory". Deconstructed, however, when Kurt tries to emulate Burt's masculine personality because he's afraid Burt's slipping away and it might be due to his being gay. In "Tested", Kurt actually removes his layers in a couple of scenes that show off his newfound muscular, chiseled physique, narrating about how he never showered after gym glass since he did everything he could not to take off his shirt back when he was a scared, anxious teenager who did not accept himself for who he was. Kurt even feels good enough about himself that he admits he is not going to apologize "for not being some delicate flower that needs his boyfriend to protect him" when Blaine admits that he thinks he's weak now that he is no longer the protector. The kid has sure come a long way...
Catchphrase: "Mr. Schue, if I may?"
Character Development: In season 1, he's catty and standoffish to all but a few, very insecure about his sexuality, and prone to manipulative scheming. Since he isn't actually good at scheming - it all comes back to bite him - he stops doing it, and in season 2 he's more comfortable with himself, rather less haughty, and better at stating his feelings honestly. Unfortunately, he's brutally harassed for the first half of season 2, so he's also short-tempered, irritable, and miserable. But, what with the whole Glee club rallying around him, and his romance with Blaine, he comes out happier overall. As of late season 2, he's firm friends with people who used to bully him, and smiles more often than not.
Character Tics: He's always seen sitting with his legs crossed.
Closet Key: To Karofsky. The title is neither expected nor appreciated.
The Confidant: Becomes this for Sam in "Rumours", after learning by accident that Sam's family has lost their house and is living out of a motel room and a car. He helps Sam out by giving him some spare clothes and keeps the secret even under considerable duress when the WHMS rumor mill starts churning.
Cool Car: Had one in "Acafellas". His dad takes it away at the end of the episode.
Deadpan Snarker: Especially towards Rachel.
Defrosting Ice Queen: He starts out as a haughty Deadpan Snarker, but it's a front - he just has to really trust you (or be taken off-guard) before he'll drop it. Chris Colfer has actually said that Kurt's "I'm better than you" persona is really a cover for his insecurity.
Dressed in Layers: His NYADA audition in "Choke", in which he starts out in a cape, tux and mask for 'Music of the Night' and then, on confirming that his auditor will be bored brainless by hearing that song for the millionth time, launches into 'Not the Boy Next Door' from The Boy From Oz instead...and on the line 'Underneath there is somebody new' rips away the tux to reveal a black blouse and skintight gold jeans. Lampshaded by Blaine in "The First Time", who says it would be theoretically very difficult to rip off Kurt's clothes because of all the layers he wears on a daily basis.
Dude Looks Like a Lady:
Emma describes him as looking like an eleven year-old milkmaid, and one of Sue's nicknames for him is "Ladyface". Also has a tendency to show up in women's clothing, including skirts - and not look too bad in them.
Mercedes: So, is that a men's sweater?
Kurt: Fashion has no gender.
More than a few straight male viewers were wondering who that cute blonde girl in "Hairography" was, only to realize afterwards it was just Kurt in a wig.
And then there's the time he and Blaine went trick-or-treating in costume as Snooki and The Situation...
Easily Forgiven:
Screwing with Rachel to get her to blow her chance with Finn because he's in love with him too. Finn apologizes to Kurt for using homophobic language. Kurt has yet to make apologies for sexual harassment, or for contributing to Finn's BSOD. Burt most likely forgave Finn off-screen, as he was acting on impulse when he overheard their argument. Giving up his duet with Sam in "Duets" can be read as a tacit apology - for the things Finn actually merited an apology for, at least, not the overblown, offensive and actively harmful garbage Finn spewed at him in that episode.
Blaine, after the incredibly cold-hearted and callous way that Kurt broke off their engagement with no prior warning, which caused Blaine to enter such deep depression that he failed out of school! Considering that Kurt attended the same school, that means he had to have been ignoring Blaine pretty studiously to not notice how badly he had emotionally damaged him. Although Blaine said he'd never forgive Kurt for what he done, when next they met back in Lima, Blaine immediately forgave Kurt.
Failed Audition Plot: Having been unaccountably rejected by NYADA at the end of Season 3 and spent the summer depressed and losing hope, Kurt packs up and moves to New York City at the start of Season 4, planning to re-audition for the Spring semester. In "Swan Song", he resoundingly succeeded at his second chance, winning not only a place at NYADA but a standing ovation for his surprise (even to him) audition at its ridiculously high-profile Winter Showcase.
The Fashionista: Lampshaded all the time. See also Unlimited Wardrobe.
Kurt: I'm so depressed I've worn the same outfit twice this week.
Feminine Women Can Cook: Kurt is the only boy in the Home Economics class.
Flying Under the Gaydar: Twice, once in "Preggers" (trying to explain to his father why he was dancing to Beyoncé) and again in "Laryngitis" (trying to win his dad back from Finn by being the son he thinks his father always wanted). Subverted on both occasions as his dad knows exactly what's going on.
Foregone Conclusion: It was never a question of if Kurt would return from Dalton, it was a matter of when. He finally does in "Born This Way", after spending nine episodes there.
Freudian Slip: In "Prom Queen:"
Kurt: Go with God, Satan. [handwaves] Santana.
Gay Guy Seeks Popular Jock: When he had a crush on Finn at the beginning.
Graceful Loser: In season 3, he's really upset to lose out on the lead role in West Side Story and the class presidential race, but warmly congratulates the people who won.
Grease Monkey: It’s implied that for all his Camp Gay mannerisms, Kurt is actually both knowledgeable about and comfortable around cars, being the son of a mechanic, to the point that both father and son work on a car in "Wheels".
Hard Work Hardly Works: Throughout the whole of Season 3 Kurt metaphorically breaks his back trying to put together an exceptional application and audition for NYADA, culminating in an audition for which he prepares two fully-staged, difficult showtune routines, both of which were transposed from the original keys to suit his voice better, and both of which involved costumes, dance routines and either acting partners or backup singers. He then switches from the obvious choice ('Music of the Night') to the one that's 'a little more out there, but much more me' ('Not the Boy Next Door') on the spot after realising that Dean Carmen Tibideaux would be bored stiff by yet another round of Andrew Lloyd Webber, kills the routine and is roundly praised for both the risk-taking and the quality of his performance...but doesn't get into NYADA. Contrast this with Rachel, who put more work into stalking the Dean and snivelling over not being given a second chance than she did into preparing her Season One success 'Don't Rain on My Parade' for the audition (and therefore choking on it on the day), but still gets in. Carmen explains to Kurt that she thought he was talented but devoid of complexity and depth. Kurt's number was surface but no soul.
Have You Tried Not Being a Monster?: Subverted. Kurt's ill-fated attempt at acting straight and dating Brittany essentially served to poke holes in the tired and logically-flawed "How do you know you're gay if you've never been with the opposite sex?" argument. Burt claims he's known Kurt was gay since age three, when all he wanted for his birthday was "a pair of sensible heels".
He Is Not My Boyfriend: Insists (accurately, as of "A Very Glee Christmas") that Blaine is not his boyfriend, though he is willing to admit to Mr Schue that he is attracted to Blaine. In "Original Song", they get together for real.
He's Back!: As of "Born this Way", Kurt Hummel is back at McKinley. In a top hat, no less.
Hidden Depths:
Fashionable queeny soprano ... who enjoyed playing football, has read Sun Tzu, knows his way around the inside of a car, and is seriously smart.
And whose actor, from all reports, has one HELL of a talent with a set of sai!
During the "Funk" episode, we see his voice, which has previously remained in the high tenor range, extends to a baritone/bass with "Tear the Roof Off."
Hypocrite: A problem with his character in the earlier seasons. Eventually he matures out of most of this.
In the first season, Kurt comes out of the closet and starts to get used to living as an out gay man. He begins to assert that he was born gay and can't change who he is for someone else... but at the same time, he tries to seduce Finn, who happens to be decidedly straight. He keeps telling Finn that girls are all catty and troublesome so as to convince him that he should go out with boys instead, causing him to question his relationship with Rachel, and literally getting him moved into Kurt's own bedroom - in other words, he tries to turn Finn gay. He made a slightly less aggressive attempt on Sam.
Kurt also tended to express open disdain for others (and their fashion choices) even as he felt that it was unfair that he himself was picked on.
Plus he was disdainful of the idea of bisexuality.
He also tends to dismiss the idea that there is, or should be, any difference between "male" or "female" performance roles, but invariably favors female ones and becomes angry if forced to perform with the guys instead of the girls.
Hypocritical Heartwarming: In "Funk", after learning about what Vocal Adrenaline did to Rachel, Kurt declares, "Mr. Schue, Rachel is one of us. We're the only ones who get to humiliate her."
I Just Want to Be Loved: The explanation for his schemes, basically comes out and says it in "Duets".
Incompatible Orientation: Mercedes and Brittany wanting to date Kurt, and Kurt wanting to date Finn and Sam.
Innocently Insensitive: In "Dance with Somebody", Kurt begins texting a boy he met at the local music store quite often after their encounter, but does not tell him about Blaine. While Kurt does admit to Rachel that he wouldn't tell Blaine about it and gets defensive when Blaine finds out, his semi-embarrassment about the situation more comes from the fact that he knows Blaine is the kind of touchy-feely person that needs his emotional needs to be met every second and would become really upset if Kurt met his emotional needs elsewhere. However, Kurt seems genuinely clueless as to how this could count as cheating after Blaine accuses him of it, and it's clear from his words and his tone when he reassures Blaine about not being alone once he goes to New York that Kurt had no intention of actually ruining their relationship. It's just that, to him, Blaine had become distant recently and the fact that he used to be the only publicly gay student at school meant that he always had to fall back on a fantasy life to meet his emotional needs. Both Rachel and Blaine tell him that he should have just talked to Blaine about the rut they were in instead of letting some guy flirt with him behind Blaine's back, and it takes Burt talking about how things have become so casual between them that they haven't really acknowledged Kurt's leaving for Kurt to finally understand that this is the reason Blaine has been distant.
It's All About Me: When Burt tells him that he called Carole and got the whole story behind the homophobic comments Finn made when they were roommates, Kurt reveals that him being too caught up in his ridiculous fantasies to accept that both Finn and Sam are straight stems from a feeling of isolation as the only gay kid in his school... which is not exactly an excuse. He eventually meets openly gay Blaine Anderson and falls in love with him, but then Blaine kisses Rachel during a game of spin the bottle at her house party for the New Directions, and subsequently wonders whether he might be bisexual. Kurt denies the existence of bisexuality, telling Blaine that he admired how proud he was of who he was and how he's not happy that Blaine's tiptoeing back into the closet, since he still isn't inclined to let someone he's interested in define their sexuality in a way that lessens his chances of being with them. However, Kurt does start to get better about these selfish tendencies when he and Blaine finally become an Official Couple - see "Asian F", where he brings Blaine flowers to congratulate him on getting the part that Kurt had desperately wanted. It reasserts itself however, when Santana opts to propose to Brittany in front of all their closest friends (i.e. the New Directions), and Kurt rudely interrupts to declare that none of them should even consider getting married at their age, externalizing his bitterness over his aborted engagement with Blaine, which he was actually the one to call off.
"I Want" Song: Kurt’s rendition of "Rose’s Turn" in "Layrngitis" fits under this.
Lampshade Hanging: Semi-in-universe example: Chris Colfer's poem at the final Glee Live show in Dublin, delivered in-character as Kurt, lampshades practically every major statement critics have made about him.
Kurt: I swear to God, I'm gonna punch the next person who calls me a stereotype.
Like an Old Married Couple: With Blaine. Albeit, in the words of Kurt himself, a -fabulous- old married couple.
Like Parent, Like Spouse:
It's not a nice thought, but Finn does have noticeable similarities in personality and interests to Kurt's father, as evidenced by how well they get along at the end of "Home".
Increasingly averted in Season Two, as Blaine has little in common with Burt besides liking college football. It seems the only real characteristic Kurt's love interests need to share with his father are kindness and genuine acceptance.
Loner-Turned-Friend: Kurt was explicitly friendless at the beginning of the series, mostly due to his sexuality. Joining glee club helps him open up and befriend the other members.
Love Makes You Crazy: His crush on Finn made him act a little crazy, and almost a little stalker-ish. Most people don't try and set up their widowed father with their crush's widowed mother, just to get closer.
Magical Queer: Subverted. Sure, Kurt seems like the helpful gay pal, giving our hetero hero and heroine relationship advice and even an attention-drawing makeover, but the only attention the 'makeover' was designed to draw was looks of horror from Finn and the 'advice' was tailored to try and turn Finn off women completely and become more receptive to his advances.
Man in a Kilt: His prom outfit.
Missing Mom: His mother died when he was eight of unknown causes.
Mistaken for Cheating: With Sam in "Rumours".
New Transfer Student: He stays in Dalton from "Furt" all the way to "Born This Way".
"Not So Different" Remark: Blaine points out that Kurt's biphobia makes him similar to Karofsky in his bigotry.
N-Word Privileges: Does not like being called "lady" or anything similar, unless it's himself or a close friend: e.g. Kurt's "I bring a glass of warm milk to Finn every night just so that we can have a little lady-chat" in "Sue Sylvester Shuffle", and Rachel's "Ladies, we have a problem" to Kurt and Mercedes in "Audition", which he rolls his eyes indignantly at (remember that at the time, Rachel and Kurt had yet to really become friends).
Odd Friendship:
Kurt and Brittany (before she "dated" him), hanging out with him and doing the "Single Ladies" dance despite being a Cheerio and Kurt being in Glee.
His friendship with Rachel started off this way, though it's easy to forget how weird it was now. In season 4 he becomes roommates with Rachel, and oddly enough, Santana.
Platonic Life-Partners: His friendship with Mercedes, which is one of the most heartwarming things about the show.
Mercedes has now been semi-replaced by Rachel.
He and Rachel, too, seem to be taking this direction.
Plucky Guy: Not himself, for obvious reasons, but Sue invokes this trope in relation to him when demanding him to perform in drag at Nationals: "Meet the plucky transsexual Porcelina".
Pretty Boy: He has ambiguously feminine physical traits. He's tall(ish), lightly-muscled but has a slender build and his face is without facial hair. His big eyes often brim with anguish. His appearance is youthful and he occasionally crosses boundaries of sexuality and gender, plus he has a rather feminine voice.
Prom Wrecker: Is the victim of this when someone rigs the vote so that he becomes Prom Queen. However, while initially upset, he manages to turn this around.
Puppy-Dog Eyes: Possibly even worse than Finn's, they're huge and blue and possibly the primary reason you love him even when you want to slap him. For an excellent example, just watch him persuading Ms. Holliday to teach Glee club in "Substitute".
Real Men Wear Pink: Reversed. He's the Camp Gay who plays football and fixes cars.
Relationship Upgrade: With Blaine as of "Original Song" to the joy of squeeing fangirls.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Sensitive Guy to both Finn and Blaine's Manly Man.
Signature Headgear: He has a penchant for interesting headgear choices, such as fedoras and Banzai bandannas, and in the season 1 finale, a sailor hat. A little unexpected since boys are normally not allowed to wear hats in school. In "Grilled Cheesus", he goes to Mercedes' church when she says he can wear one.
Kurt: Oh Mercedes, you had me at "fabulous hat".
Stalker with a Crush: Even though his love for Finn was doomed from the start, it hasn't stopped him from doing some rather creepy things in an effort to get close to him. Some of his schemes include manipulating Finn into exposing Quinn's pregnancy to her parents, tricking Rachel into dressing like a "sad clown hooker", and setting up his dad with Finn's mom with the goal that they'll combine households so he and Finn can share a bedroom.
Stuffed into a Trashcan: Tossed into dumpsters all the time in the first season.
Suspiciously Specific Denial: He certainly did not steal Sue's "Physical" video from her locked file cabinet when she sent him to get her hormone injection before Cheerios practice.
Taking the Bullet: In the first season, Finn rejoins the football team and in order to prove his loyalty to them, is told he must give a slushie facial to either Kurt or one of his friends. He's hesitating because he "knows how particular Kurt is about what products go on his face." Kurt's response is to grab the Slushie out of Finn's hand and splash on his own face:
Kurt: That's called taking one for the team. Would any of your football buddies do that for you?
Transparent Closet: But as far as Mercedes is concerned, it may as well have been made of lead until he comes out to her. He has also mentioned he has only come out to her and his father. In "Laryngitis", pretty much no one is fooled by his "straight boy" charade except the dim-witted Brittany, who takes it as an opportunity to add him to her list of boys she's kissed.
Ukefication: Deliberate example. Several of the images in◊ this article◊ from Entertainment Weekly portray Kurt as looking rather demure towards and much shorter than Blaine. However, Kurt is much more acerbic on the actual show, and Chris Colfer is significantly taller than Darren Criss in real life.
Unexpectedly Prudish: Kurt is an out and proud gay teen in small-town Ohio who is brave enough to perform Lady Gaga in costume and do The Rocky Horror Picture Show at their high school, but Season 2's "Sexy" reveals Kurt actually doesn't know a lot about sex, feels uncomfortable watching "those movies" because he sees the actors involved as children, and shies away when Blaine tries to enlighten him. Justified, since Kurt is implied to have gotten this behavior from his father, who also gets cagey when Blaine asks him to have the talk with Kurt and wanted to wait until Kurt came to him before broaching the subject.
Unlimited Wardrobe: Justified. Although he has a seemingly unlimited wardrobe, Kurt doesn't wear designer clothes, but rather sews and tailors his own hand-me-downs and thrift store pieces to resemble designer outfits, and tops them up with bargains found online and scrounged items.
Viewer Gender Confusion: In-universe. Emma also said that he looked like an eleven-year old Milkmaid, and Sam mistook Kurt's voice for Faith Hill's.
Virginity Makes You Stupid:
Discussed in "Sexy". Kurt pretty much doesn't want to know about sex, preferring to romanticize it completely. This is rather justified by the fact that he's always been discouraged from acting on his feelings for other boys, but Blaine worries that with this attitude, Kurt's first time will end up being the exact "lecherous predator seduces helpless naif" scenario that is a staple of this trope. Still, it's worth it for Kurt's thoughts on gay porn:
Kurt: I've tried watching those movies, but I just get horribly depressed because they were all kids once and they all had mothers and what would their mothers say? And why would you get a tattoo there?
He has since grown out of this trope, since he and Blaine first had sex in season 3. Season 5 makes it very clear that their sex life is very active.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: His arc in the latter half of Season One, involves him trying to gain approval from his very traditionally masculine dad, and hoping that his dad won't prefer his stepbrother. His dad however, has never been anything other than supportive, and makes clear that he loves Kurt just how he is.
What the Hell, Hero?:
In the second season, Kurt gets called out by his father for his inappropriate behavior towards Finn.
Also when he openly states his belief that there are no such thing as Bisexuals. This promptly gets him called out by everyone for the fact that he often plays the "Homophobia-Card", yet seems to think he is allowed to get away with biphobic comments. Blaine even compares him to Karofsky and his bigotry. However, this is one of many cases of Kurt's It's All About Me mentality overriding his alleged principles. At the time he was romantically interested in Blaine, and Blaine was the one questioning whether he himself might be bisexual (and attracted to Rachel). As was the case with Finn, Kurt wasn't inclined to let somebody else that he was interested in define their own sexuality in a way that might lessen his chances of getting with them.