Betty and Veronica:
She could be considered the Betty to Santana’s Veronica in their competition for Puck.
She's the Archie to Shane's Betty and Sam's Veronica.
Beware the Nice Ones: Mercedes is a loyal friend to Kurt, and has Quinn stay with her when pregnant, but when Kurt said he didn't want to date her, she smashed his car's windshield.
Big Beautiful Woman:
Her performance of "Sweet Transvestite" finally shows off her sexy side.
And season four's "Higher Ground" cements the fact that Mercedes Jones is sexy without needing to be slutty.
Big Eater: Becomes this in "The Substitute."
Brilliant, but Lazy: Touched upon near the end of season 2 and brought to a head in season 3. She has an excellent voice, and many people have said she's as good as, if not better than, Rachel (including Rachel). However, she rarely practices and is often late to rehearsals, fakes stomach pains, shows less camaraderie, and still feels entitled for lead roles solely on her talent. By "Asian F" she quits the Glee Club and joins Shelby's group out of anger and spite.
Casting Couch: In "Wonder-ful", Mercedes reveals her record producer has been pressuring her to show more skin for her album cover, knowing she's an 18-year-old girl alone in the big city and has hung all her dreams on this album.
Catchphrase: "Hell to the no!" In "Original Song", she writes a song about it.
Commuting on a Bus: As of season 4.
Deadpan Snarker: She's usually sweet, but can deliver some good verbal smackdowns.
Easily Forgiven: Mercedes throws a brick through the windshield of Kurt's new car. It does provide the dramatic impetus for her to sing an awesome rendition of "Bust Your Windows", though.
Face–Heel Turn: In "Asian F". Her bad attitude towards Mr. Schuester and the rest of the club, along with her rage at not getting Maria in West Side Story, cause her to quit and join Shelby's new club.
Friendly Enemy: Later episodes showed her as not being antagonistic towards the New Directions though.
Heel–Face Turn: The Troubletones' loss at Sectionals and Will's promise to feature Mercedes and Santana in New Directions brought her back to the club.
Fag Hag: For Kurt, as lampshaded by Sue: "Future center square Kurt Hummel and his brassy hag, Mercedes."
The Fashionista: Not as much as Kurt, but she has some level of it.
Fat Best Friend: She's Kurt's best friend, and she's noticeably plus-sized.
Green-Eyed Monster: She is very envious of all the attention the club gives Rachel.
Ham-to-Ham Combat: Her "diva-off" with Rachel could be considered this.
Hard Work Hardly Works: Most of the time. This is shown to be a problem in Season 3, though.
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: With Shane in season three.
I Just Want to Be Loved: The main reason she believed Kurt liked her, and why she dated Puck. She cites this as her reason for not going to prom because she's dateless, too.
Imagined Innuendo: Mercedes suspects that Kurt is gay...at least until the cheerleaders tell her he likes her. Then she interprets every time they hang out as a date. Unfortunately, her first instincts were correct.
Incompatible Orientation: Mercedes crushed on Kurt hard in "Aca-fellas" until he finally told her unambiguously that he was gay. Though to be fair, she suspected as much and only pursued it because she was egged on by Quinn and Santana (and this was early in the first season, so it's not like they were trying to help her).
The Leader: Finally gets to be this to the Troubletones.
Like Brother and Sister: Mercedes and Kurt have this kind of friendship, as they are extremely close and one of the show's most heartwarming friendships.
Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places: It takes her into the end of Season Two to find a partner who reciprocates her feelings (longer than any other member of the club), and before then, the most romance she'd gotten was a fruitless crush on Kurt, and a brief spell dating Puck, primarily for Puck's image.
Love Makes You Dumb: She gets a big crush on Kurt, which makes her oblivious to his obvious homosexuality until he spells it out for her.
Meat-O-Vision: Mercedes suffers from this in "Home" after going on a diet for Sue.
The Mentor: Her job in season four has been as the new vocal coach of New Directions. More explicitly, she serves as one of Unique's mentors, along with Kurt, helping her find her confidence.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: As awesome as her performance of "Beautiful" was, it caused a journalist to scrap his expose on Sue as a total bitch and heap undeserved praises on her instead.
Odd Friendship: With Quinn, who even requests that Mercedes be in the room with her while she's giving birth.
Pair the Spares: As of "New York", with Sam, who gives her a hug after "Light Up the World" and is seen going with her on a date at the Lima Bean later, despite the fact that they previously hadn't interacted much before "Prom Queen." Their relationship is fleshed out more in Season 3.
Platonic Life-Partners: For most of Seasons One and Two, Mercedes and Kurt are joined at the hip.
The Prima Donna: Flanderized in "Night of Neglect", but in general, she is a diva and proud of it.
Put on a Bus: For the end of season three.
The Bus Came Back: In New New York Leaves again six episodes later.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Gives one to Rachel in "Asian F", which has been a long time in coming.
Religious Stereotype: Mercedes' church, shown in "Grilled Cheesus", is as stereotypically black and full of ladies in hats and fans as you can get. Mercedes herself spends most of the episode pressuring Kurt to attend church with her and help her pray for his father.
One of her catchphrases is "praise!" and she frequently references her faith.
Sassy Black Woman: She's quite loud, vivacious and prone to being the Only Sane Woman.
Sesquipedalian Smith: Has the long, unusual and Spanish first name of 'Mercedes' paired with the very, very normal 'Jones'.
Staying with Friends: In "Funk", Mercedes offers to let Quinn stay at her house as long as she needs to after Quinn's father had coldly kicked her out.
Technician vs. Performer: The Performer to Rachel's Technician; Mercedes relies on a boatload of natural talent and not so much on rehearsal.
Token Minority: She seems to be a walking stereotype, despite her saying being a proud black woman isn't all she is. Although the show has given her a bit of character development with some I Just Want to Be Loved storylines and her season three break from New Directions.
Token Shipping: Kurt tries to pair her off with a football player, who happens to be one of the only Black students at McKinley. She later dates Shane, who is also one of the only Black students at McKinley.
Worthy Opponent: Santana, especially when the two of them team up for "Duets", then later come to terms on leadership of the Troubletones.