Academic Athlete: Is apparently on the academic decathlon team, as well as being a football player and a dancer.
Beta Couple: Him and Tina could be considered this to, well everyone, considering they have, hands-down, the most stable relationship in the show and were together throughout the entirety of seasons 2 and 3, and showed no signs of breaking up during it. However, they do break up shortly before the beginning of season 4.
Character Development: It helps that he's actually getting lines (and songs) now.
Commuting on a Bus: In season 4.
Fake Guest Star: For the first two seasons. He became a series regular in the third season.
Fantasy-Forbidding Father: His father wants him to give up performing to be a doctor.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: A possible, and quite more realistic, explanation for Mike and Matt's friendship and close bond.
Hidden Depths: Possibly the one with the biggest Hidden Depths next to Artie, Mike is initially seen only as a football player, but as the series progresses it's revealed he is one hell of a dancer, possibly the best dancer in the group, and if "Sectionals" and "Asian F" are anything to go by, he is also a skilled choreographer. Another showing of his Hidden Depths is his apparent easy friendship with the "losers" of the group (Tina, Artie, Kurt and Mercedes) as seen in both "Throwdown" and "Dream On". He's one of the most enthusiastic members of New Directions, even if he isn't the most vocal. As soon as the music starts Mike starts moving. "A Night of Neglect" reveals that he's also on the academic decathlon team and at prom, we find out that he has a childlike love of dinosaurs.
Hollywood Tone-Deaf: As heard in "Sing!". Justified as the song is supposed to sound like that. Later episodes, in particular "Asian F", slowly subvert this with the explanation that he's training his vocal prowess.
I Have No Son!: His father disowns him for pursuing his dancing career. He comes around eventually.
Lovable Jock: Mike was one of the few jocks who didn't have an ounce of Jerkass in him. When forced to choose between Glee Club and Football, he went with Glee Club without a second thought.
Mistaken for Cheating: With Brittany in "Special Education."
Mr. Fanservice: Just watch this video.
Nice Guy
Offscreen Breakup: With Tina at the start of season 4.
Also with Brittany at some point late in Season 1 or between Seasons 1 and 2 (assuming the implications that they are in a relationship are true), since when the second season starts Mike and Tina are already dating.
One-Steve Limit: Averted. He and Tina both have the last name "Chang" (hyphenated, in her case), with no indication they're related, moreso that they're dating now.
Mike Chang and Tina Cohen-Chang. No relations.
The Quiet One
Relationship Reveal: Dating Tina as of season 2, despite previously being a popular Crack Pairing by the Fandom.
Satellite Character: Season 1.
Shirtless Scene: At Asian Camp. This leads Tina to chow down on the eye candy so hard that they hook up.
Token Minority Couple: With Tina. The show even lampshades it by having the word "Asian" come up nearly every time the two of them are together.
The Un-Reveal: In "Duets," for the people who were hoping to finally hear Mike sing. He finally gets a brief singing role alongside Tina in "Marry You" from "Furt."
Mike finally has his own song as of "Asian F," in which he sings "Cool" from West Side Story.
"Well Done, Son" Guy