Aesop Amnesia: Almost every season has been spent teaching Rachel that it's not all about her and that success depends on others, since she just keeps forgetting this lesson. Only in the sixth season premiere "Loser Like Me" does it finally stick thanks to her severe humbling; though she still retains the drive and passion, the overt ego is rightly deflated.
Age-Inappropriate Dress:
Kurt: She manages to dress like a grandmother and a kindergartner at the same time.
Allegedly Dateless: For a girl who is supposedly "unpopular" and "mildly attractive", she already dated three boys within her sophomore year, and another was very attracted to her.
All Jews Are Ashkenazi: Demonstrated when Rachel lectures Quinn about Tay-Sachs syndrome and how her cousin had to get checked for it, although since it was her way of forcing Quinn to come clean about the paternity of her baby, it may be debatable.
All the Other Reindeer: Rachel is treated as an outcast, by the whole school—including her fellow glee clubbers.
Alpha Bitch: She shows some characteristics of this within the confines of the club, calling Kurt and Mercedes "lesser glee clubbers" to their faces, telling Tina and Mike that their contribution to the club will be "even more insignificant" than it already is" if a potential new recruit can dance, and even sent her new rival to a crack house instead of an audition. Her specialty is sweetly offering a brutal putdown and justifying it as "honesty"—not unlike Santana.
Always Second Best: In "Audition", Rachel discovers that the new exchange student is a better singer than she is. Rachel herself functions as this for everyone else in New Directions, though one who's heavily invested in having them all recognize and accept her superiority. However, she is increasingly shown not to be definitively better at anything than all the other members of the club since she has vocal equals in Mercedes and Kurt, and is relegated to the back row with the weakest dancers in several numbers while Tina and Kurt move to the front row alongside Brittany, Santana and Mike.
Ambiguously Bi: Yes, really. In "Mattress", it's revealed that Rachel wants to get into as many clubs as possible so she can be in as many yearbook pictures as possible, and the club she suggests to Kurt that they form is a Gay Lesbian Alliance (she says it'll make her the most involved student at the school, whereas she joined all the other clubs to give off the appearance that she's involved and even notes that glee club is different because she actually likes being in it). Plus, there's this little exchange from "Wonder-ful":
Rachel: But what about the whole Brody thing?
Cassie: That was because of his abs.
Rachel: But yours are so much better.
Attention Whore: She sent a prospective club member with a really good voice to a crack house so that she wouldn't upstage her, then tried to pass it off as protecting the roles of the others.
Bad "Bad Acting": "Run Joey Run". Also, while the writing on her sitcom "That's So Rachel" was obviously not very good either, her performance made it very clear that she is not adept in non-musical roles. The show crashed and burned after airing just a single episode and she was mocked by virtually everyone who saw it.
Betty and Veronica: An interesting case, as she could be seen as both the Betty (the girl next door vibe in comparison to the Libby that is Quinn) and the Veronica (her overbearing and control freak personality in comparison to Quinn’s Christian upbringing) at the same time. She later becomes the Archie to Finn's Betty and both Puck and Jesse's Veronica.
Big "SHUT UP!": Rachel gets one against Puck in "Auditions".
Break the Cutie: In "Funk" she suffered one hell of a breaking at the hands of her ex–boyfriend and his teammates, ending with literal egg on her face.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Is seen this way by the other New Directions at first: they think she's obnoxious and rude, but they tolerate it because of her talent. Puck says it best in "The Rhodes Not Taken":
Puck: That Rachel chick makes me want to light myself on fire, but she can sing.
Butt-Monkey: She's the club's favourite punching bag, and they love to use her as a shorthand for the 'most insufferable person you know'
Child Prodigy: In terms of music, as she both won her first dance competition at three months old and won a singing competition at eight months old.
Concert Kiss: After "Pretending" in "New York" with Finn, complete with Held Gaze. Subverted in that the audience isn't too pleased and barely claps, and Jesse, Blaine, and Santana all think that it was unprofessional and cost them a place at Nationals.
Control Freak: Rachel likes things to go exactly the way she wants, and applies this attitude to everything.
Curtains Match the Windows: Has brown hair and eyes.
Didn't Think This Through: When she finds out Finn slept with Santana, she tries to get back at him by trying to sleep with Puck, thinking it will be canceled out by Finn's actions. Unfortunately, she forgot the fact that they weren't together when Finn did it, meaning that she cheated on him, which leads to him dumping her.
Extracurricular Enthusiast: Rachel's joined every club in the school, even ones she would normally have no business being in. Subverted in that she doesn't do it because she loves the activities, she does it to get as many photos of herself in the school yearbook as possible.
Fag Hag: Has all the makings of one, as illustrated by Kurt in "Blame It On The Alcohol".
Failed Attempt at Drama: Rachel attempting to storm out in a wheelchair, and bumping into the doorframe.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Of the Glee Club, she's the one who often gets the most flak from the rest of the team, with basically everyone at one point taking a shot at her for her ego, narcissism and pride.
Generic Cuteness: She is often referred as "mildly attractive".
Genki Girl: Rachel always signs her name with a gold-star sticker, and wakes up every day at 6:00 for her daily exercise routine. She claims to have won her first dance competition at three months old. This is actually believable since in Dream On she shows Jesse a singing trophy from eight months old. Maybe it's just because she's Shelby Corcoran's daughter.
Girl Next Door: She's an odd example. In the Finn/Quinn/Rachel triangle, she represents the average girl to Quinn, who is head cheerleader and very pretty, but in most other respects, Rachel isn't really a girl next door, being incredibly talented and having a very...unusual personality
Go-Getter Girl: She is set on becoming a broadway diva, no matter what. She is active in every possible extracurricular and has straight A's.
Heel Realization: In "Duets" Rachel finally realizes that her desire to win hasn't made her as nice as she likes to think she is. She then spends the entire episode trying to do things for other people, which in one case means actively trying to lose at something.
Heroic Sacrifice: Of sorts. After stuffing the ballot in order to help Kurt win the election and Kurt is blamed for it, she admits it so that he can avoid suspension and a mark on his permanent record. She gets them instead, as well as being banned from Sectionals that year.
Hot for Teacher: Rachel develops a short-lived crush on Will in Episode 10.
Huge Guy, Tiny Girl: Rachel is only 5'2" and slender to Finn's solidly built 6'3"
Humiliation Conga: The entire point of season 6's first episode. See also Karma Houdini Warranty.
Hypocritical Humor: Fairly often.
Rachel: They're so wrapped up in their own little worlds that they can't see how this affects me!
I Can't Believe a Guy Like You Would Notice Me: As a girl who's used to being at the bottom of the social ladder, she's amazed that guys as handsome and popular as Jesse and Finn are interested. Notably, she tells Finn that this has never really gone away, and she'll always see him as the guy way out of her league, even after the tables turn.
I Just Want to Be Special: She explicitly tells Mr. Schuester that she's in the glee club to win popularity. To Jesse in "Bad Reputation": "I have a pathological desire to be popular." However, it should be noted that she remains in the Glee club even when it starts to become an obstacle to her popularity, so she probably has other reasons.
Incompatible Orientation: Let's face it, her and Blaine's relationship was doomed from the start. Subverted, as Rachel didn't seem to actually be in love with Blaine. It seems that the fact that he can sing and is a good kisser is enough for her to decide to date him, and she's positively thrilled when he tells her that he's gay after all:
Rachel: That was amazing! I am speechless! I just had a relationship with a guy that turned out to be gay; that is song writing gold!
Informed Ability: Yes, Lea Michele is exceptionally talented. But the way they go on about her, you'd think she was the only talented member of the cast. Softened in seasons 2 and 3 when she admits that Mercedes is equally or more talented than her.
Informed Flaw: The show goes on and on about how she doesn't dress well, when actually she looks quite cute in a preppy schoolgirl way. When it's decided she needs a makeover in Episode 11, to showcase her bad fashion sense she's suddenly wearing a monochromatic pantsuit that was nothing like anything her character has ever worn before. Her dressing does get a bit worse in the second half of the season. Remember that owl sweater?
Informed Judaism: Rachel wanted her hypothetical future children to be raised Jewish, but it is presented as an instance of her 'controllist' tendencies rather than a genuine religious choice, and she both gives and accepts Christmas presents despite not celebrating Christmas with her fathers.
The Ingenue: Rachel calls herself one. Frankly, she isn't.
It's All About Me: Rachel has this bad. Whenever Mr. Schuester wants to have another student have the opportunity to sing a song that Rachel wants to sing so that everyone has a chance, she thinks of it as Mr. Schuester attempting to ruin her career. She's getting better than how she originally was, though she seemed to reset every single season, with the last episodes of Season 5 putting her at the peak of this trope.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Rachel is selfish, dramatic, unscrupulous and rude, but she's also a very forgiving and passionate person, who can be a truly good friend when she doesn't feel threatened.
Karma Houdini Warranty: For most of the series, Rachel has gotten away with a lot, but her actions finally catch up to her in season 6. She no longer has a career in Broadway and there is little to no doubt that no one will hire her again after she acted so unprofessionally. She is out of NYADA and has no chance to get in again after the way she quit, and her show was so terrible it was immediately canceled and demolished her reputation. All of these events led her to have a breakdown, and she went into hiding for months. She is then forced to leave New York and go live with her dads again... only to discover they are getting divorced and that her house is for sale. While she is pushed by Mercedes to audition for another show and is offered the leading role, and Carmen Tibideaux also grants her permission to return to NYADA despite her warning that she would not be allowed back when she left (granted, she does this after kicking Rachel out of her office when Rachel goes to beg her for another shot at NYADA), later in the season, Rachel has at least learned from her mistakes and chooses NYADA over immediate Broadway stardom this time around, which culminates in her winning a Tony Award.
Kick the Dog: Decides to get even with Finn for lying about sleeping with Santana by cheating on Finn with Puck.
Kissing Under the Influence: She and Blaine kiss while drunk.
Locked Out of the Loop:
Santana: Nobody tells you anything because A: you are a blabbermouth, and B: we all just pretend to like you.
Lonely at the Top: Rachel says this verbatim in one of her interior monologues in Episode 12 when Finn doesn't show up for the Glee Club yearbook photo.
Love Makes You Crazy: More like Love Makes You Obsessive in the case with Rachel and Finn, to the point that he has admitted that he is slightly unnerved by her.
Make Over Montage: Gets a rather unnecessary one in the fourth season episode "Makeover" after Kurt tells her The Knee Socks Gotta Go. The end result is basically Rachel Berry in Lea Michele's clothes. Said knee socks made two more appearances; one in "The Quarterback", implying that Finn's death rattled Rachel to the point of "stripping" her down to her base elements, and the other in a dream sequence depicting her self-confidence issues.
Meaningful Name: Her fathers named her Rachel because they were huge fans of Friends. Considering her major character trait, this makes sense.
Missing Mom: Although she's happily raised by her two fathers, she does want to know her mother. After meeting her, however, Rachel decides they're better off apart.
Motor Mouth: Particularly when she's gotten a good dose of "vitamin D".
Must Make Amends: Seems to be a motivating factor for a number of her post-Heel Realization actions.
Never My Fault: In Rachel's mind, even her more outrageous actions are completely justified and she was merely doing what had to be done.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: Suggested that her NYADA dance teacher, disgraced actress Cassandra July, go out for a role in the same play as her, as it might be a means of "getting back in the game." Cassandra is offended by this and retaliates by sleeping with Rachel's Love Interest Brody. Granted, her words might have been poorly chosen, but the suggestion itself was well-intentioned.
Official Couple: With Finn.
Operation: Jealousy: In "Mash-Up", Rachel admits that she began to date Puck because she thought it would make Finn jealous. It sort of worked, if Finn's face is anything to go by when Puck sings "Sweet Caroline" to Rachel. It works even better in "Special Education" when Rachel confesses to making out with Puck to get back at Finn for sleeping with Santana. Unfortunately, it works too well. Finn breaks up with her because she cheated on him. They weren't together when he slept with Santana.
And then again in "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle" when she sings "Need You Now" with Puck.
Pink Means Feminine: Both of her prom dresses invoke this, and Princesses Prefer Pink
Platonic Life-Partners: From Season Three onwards, her and Kurt are almost never apart.
Plucky Girl: All the bullying she's experienced would have gotten down someone less determined than Rachel.
Pride: Her biggest flaw. She is talented and she knows it... So much that, to her, the universe should bend to her will, because of how exceptional she is. She mellowed out of this a little during her Glee Club days, only to return in this mode when she got cast as Fanny in Funny Girl, to the point that even Kurt, who is her closest and more supportive friend, got fed up with her attitude. She also dropped out of NYADA after getting the role, despite the fact that the school (which is supposed to be the most exclusive performing arts college in New York) could teach her many things and make her an even better artist. She even jeopardized her role in Funny Girl by outright lying to her producer in order to do an audition for a TV series. Because of her self-centeredness, she nearly causes a small catastrophe because she couldn't make it back to New York in time for the show, her understudy was injured, and missing a performance reflects badly on the show and the people who bought tickets expecting to see her. She is saved by Santana, who performs the first act, but she is not fired or given any consequences whatsoever for her actions. She acts like she is invincible and nothing could ever go wrong for her, and wants always more, discarding without thinking things that no longer please her. It was only a matter of time before her childish behaviour bit her in the ass and sure enough, the first episode of the final season revealed that it not only bit her in the ass, but removed a cheek.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!:
Rachel storms out of the glee club constantly. Artie lampshades it by saying the more she does it, the less impact it has. To the point where nobody really reacts when she walks back in, either.
More seriously, she also quit NYADA, because she thought her Broadway career was more important. The ensuing events revealed that this was not a wise choice.
Sexy Sweater Girl: The show even Lampshades it.
Jacob: Let those sweater puppies out of their cashmere cage!
Shipper on Deck: If this line in Rumours is anything to go by, she's one for Kurt and Blaine.
Rachel (to Kurt): Sam's cute, but he's not worth losing Blaine over.
She's also one for Sam and Quinn. Justified, however, because it would mean she could be with Finn again.
Sizable Semitic Nose: Rachel has a large nose owing to her Jewish heritage, which she is portrayed as insecure about. When her nose is injured during rehearsal in "Born This Way", the Ambiguously Jewish doctor suggests she get a nose job, mentioning that it's something of a rite of passage for Jewish girls. She ultimately refuses and keeps her nose as it is.
Small Name, Big Ego: It takes her until season 4 to realize that despite her talent, she is a complete unknown from Ohio who is liked by very few characters.
Squee: When she and Kurt sneak onto the set of Wicked.
Stalker with a Crush: She's certainly desperate enough to become this (and eventually she does for Will). That reputation precedes her: when Puck dreamt that Rachel climbed through his bedroom window, he knew it was a dream because she wouldn't be able to climb without shoes on, rather than thinking she would never do this in the first place.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Backpedals on all her Season 1 Character Development when she tricks Sunshine into going to a crackhouse, all because she fears she'll steal her thunder.
Turn the Other Cheek: Rachel might have a tendency to hurt people to get what she wants, but she's surprisingly forgiving when other people try the same. She doesn't even get mad when Quinn slaps her at prom for something Rachel didn't even do.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: She is an extremely self-absorbed member of the glee club who not only believed she was the only singer worthy of having solo numbers (which is only partially true, as she did have more technical training than the other members) and acted as if any attempt to give them to other members was a personal attack. While there are relatable aspects of her character, it's hard to feel sorry for the comedic bullying she suffers when she herself does things like tricking a rival singer into going to a crack house, and never really being apologetic about it.
What the Hell, Hero?: Tricking Sunshine into going to a crack house to audition, because she didn't want to risk another talented singer upstaging her. Nobody believed her bald-faced lie that it was for the good of the group.
Woman Scorned: In "Hell-O", and boy does she do it well. Her rendition of "Gives You Hell" by the All American Rejects was stunning.