Ambiguously Bi: Debate raged on about Sam's sexual orientation, in-universe and out. In "Rumours," when he appears to be close to both Kurt and Quinn, the Glee kids are far more shocked by Kurt and Quinn's possible infidelity than the idea of Sam swinging both ways. It turns out to not be what they thought; Quinn and Kurt were just being good friends to Sam rather than having an affair with him. In Season 4, despite being in a relationship with Brittany, he also became best friends with Blaine and gleeks thought they had the better chemistry, to the point of Blam becoming a Fan-Preferred Couple over Bram. The fact that it's very likely he was intended to be Kurt's love interest at his conception, but then it was changed when Ryan saw chemistry between him and Quinn, probably plays in to this as well.
Amicable Exes: San has dated, Mercedes, Quinn, Rachel, Santana, and Brittany and remains close friends with all of them, though it’s a bit vitriolic with Santana.
The Beard: Santana briefly dated him to hide the fact that she's a lesbian.
Berserk Button: Do not accuse him of cheating or selling himself. And don't attack anyone in New Directions.
Book Dumb
Brainless Beauty: He's not completely brainless, but leans to the type of a ditzy Pretty Boy. Also deconstructed - there are several story-lines about him battling with himself whether to embrace this image or not.
Chekhov's Gag: When Sam first introduces himself to New Directions, Artie makes a crack at his "Bieber cut". Guess whose songs Sam is singing in "Comeback"?
Chick Magnet: Quinn, Tina, Rachel, Mercedes and Brittany have all verbalized the fact they find Sam attractive. Not to mention his boss in 5.20, a whole hoard of girls in 4.01 and even implied with Sue on occasion. Not to mention the boys who have found him attractive (Kurt, Blaine, Karofsky...). Everyone wants a piece of Sam.
Deadpan Snarker: Especially towards Will.
Did I Just Say That Out Loud?: When making out with Quinn in "Never Been Kissed," he imagines Coach Beiste in compromising positions to "cool down." And then he accidentally moans out "Beiste."
Dogged Nice Guy: He declares in the middle of a crowded hallway that, boyfriend aside, he's going to fight to get Mercedes back, stealth proposes twice, joins the swimming team to impress her, puts her name in lights, and when she rejects him even after breaking up with her boyfriend, he refuses to accept the Valentine gift he gave her back. Later episodes have him looking at her in such a way that makes it clear he still has it bad for her despite him stopping his advances.
Dude Looks Like a Lady: The mean jocks call him Lady Lips in "Duets" and Sue mistakes him for a girl in "Comeback".
Everybody Knew Already: When Sam transferred to McKinley, he was worried that someone would discover his deep secret. When Kurt pieces together the truth, Sam fesses up to Quinn: he bleaches his hair!
Expy: To Finn. Lampshaded with Finn finding him in the locker room showers, just as Will found out about Finn's singing talent in the pilot. In fact, he is Finn, but more active in protecting his friends, rather than Finn submitting to passiveness.
Fake Guest Star
Flanderization: Although he was never known for being exceptionally bright, he initially wasn't really dumb either. Once season four and his unnecessary relationship with Brittany began, however, the two basically became Too Dumb to Live and Cloud Cuckoolanders together. Furthermore, he actually mentions that he's dyslexic in his first appearance which would justify his grades and would have given him and Ryder something to bond over.
Foil: To Finn.
Foregone Conclusion: It was always a question of when Sam would join Glee Club, not if.
Iconic Sequel Character: Introduced in Season 2, being the Glee Club's newest member at the start of the season. He and Blaine were the only new characters to have significant storylines after their introductory season, and both are given a sort of "Honorary Original" status.
I Gave My Word: Sam gave one to Finn during "Duets". When Finn tells him that he shouldn't sing a duet with Kurt because that will make him a target for bullies and "we live in their world", Sam replies that he gave Kurt his word and in his world, that's that.
In-Series Nickname: Trouty Mouth. Mostly courtesy of Santana, but even complete strangers (like the manager of a modeling agency) seemed to be amazed by it's correctness.
Last Het Romance: He was the last guy Santana dated before she admitted to herself that she was a lesbian. Granted, she did "date" Karofsky after, but it was a mutual lie so both could cover up their homosexuality.
Lovable Jock
Love Martyr: Was willing to hide away his inner dork and put up with quite a lot of insults in order to keep Quinn and later Santana as his girlfriend.
Manly Tears: After Rachel and Finn show him that every member of the glee club pitched in to buy his guitar back.
Mistaken for Cheating: With Quinn and Kurt in "Rumours."
Mistaken for Gay: He dated five girls - Quinn, Santana, Mercedes, Brittany & Rachel - but fans still held out for him to be bisexual. In "Rumours," he was rumored to be meeting with both Kurt and Quinn at a motel. Fans also ship Blam (he and Blaine) and hold steady that he may have had something with him had he not been dating Brittany at the time.
Mr. Fanservice: His early episodes included at least one Shirtless Scene each time. Not that we're complaining.
New Transfer Student: Another reason he was initially afraid of joining Glee, since he's already an outsider.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: On Karofsky in "Furt" in defense of Kurt and both Mike and Artie.
Phrase Catcher: Almost everyone will comment the size of his mouth.
Pretty Boy
Sue: I gotta get that girl on my Cheerios...
Put on a Bus: Written out between season two and season three, with the explanation being that his dad got a job out of state. In real life, Chord Overstreet chose not to return when he wasn't upgraded to a series regular. It most likely would've been permanent, but negotiations were made and Sam returned in "Hold On To Sixteen".
Relationship Reveal: And a side order of Pair the Spares with Mercedes as of the end of season 2 ("New York").
Running Gag: Okay, guys. We get it, he's got a pretty big mouth.
Serial Romeo: Sam dates five of the six girls in the glee club over the course of only a few years, and seems desperate not to be alone, and almost every time he falls in love, he's pretty sure it's true love and an epic romance. He even proposed twice.
Shirtless Scene: A reasonable portion of his screentime so far includes him either in the shower or coming out of it.
Walking Shirtless Scene: Joining the swim team, shooting for a calendar, working as a stripper and later as an underwear model, playing Rocky... Anytime Sam can be shirtless, he WILL be shirtless.
Signature Move: Ever since he came back from being a stripper, Sam has been doing a lot of body rolls. They seem to have worn off on the other club guys.
Single Mom Stripper: After he moved. As ways to help his parents go, it does pay better than delivering pizzas or working at Dairy Queen.
Stupid Sexy Flanders: So says Santana.
Theme Naming: Sam's little siblings are named Stacey and Stevie.
What Happened to the Mouse?: So where exactly is Sam living in season 4? And are his parents and younger siblings all right?