Acquired Poison Immunity: She has built up a total immunity to mono.
All Guys Want Cheerleaders: Santana is considered quite desirable in general, in large part due to being a cheerleader.
Aloof Dark-Haired Girl: Santana has black hair, and is very guarded with any vulnerable emotions.
Alpha Bitch: Santana is a stronger bitch than Quinn, considering how mean she is to everyone and how she seems to delight in making people angry or upset. Though her Anguished Declaration of Love to Brittany makes it clear that at least some of this cruelty is due to being in the closet.
Anguished Declaration of Love: Gives one to Brittany after realizing she's in love with her. Unfortunately for her, Brittany rejects her due to already being in a relationship with Artie.
Santana: I'm a bitch because I'm angry. I'm angry because I have all of these feelings. Feelings for you that I'm afraid of dealing with because I'm afraid of dealing with the consequences. I wanna be with you, but I'm afraid of the talks and the looks. I mean, you know what happened to Kurt at this school. I'm so afraid of what everyone will say behind my back. Still I have to accept that. I love you. I love you and I don't want to be with Sam, Finn, or any of those guys. I just want you. Please say you love me back. Please.
Armored Closet Gay: Though the show plays with this trope: Santana doesn't exactly try to hide the fact that she and Brittany mess around behind closed doors. But it's a horse of a different color to come out as gay, admit she has feelings for Brittany and start dating her - and thereby expose herself to the homophobic bullying Kurt received. Even after Brittany breaks up with Artie in "Rumours" and offers to ask Santana to prom, she still chooses to go with Karofsky instead and pretend to be straight.
Armor-Piercing Question: Finn, after being verbally abused by Santana during the entire episode, asked her the one and only question able to hurt her back, in the middle of the school. The thing is, it led to unforeseen harsh consequences:
Finn:: Hey Santana, why don't you just come out of the closet?
Badass Boast: Towards Karofsky when he threatens Kurt and Blaine.
Santana: First of all, anything you do became my business when you decided to toss that slushie up in my grill.
Karofsky: I think I can take a couple of queers and a girl.
Santana: Ha. See, here's what's gonna go down. Two choices: you stay here and I crack one of your nuts - right or left, that's your choice - or you walk away and live to be a douchebag another day. Oh, and also? I have razor blades hidden in my hair. Mm-hm. Tons, just all up in there.
The Beard: She and Karofsky attend prom together, despite her being lesbian and him being gay, in order to preserve their reputations and keep their sexualities hidden.
Beta Bitch: In the beginning she was this, usurps Quinn's role as The Alpha Bitch fairly early on, then the two fight each other for the title of Alpha Bitch in season 2.
Betty and Veronica:
Santana is firmly the Veronica in the six romantic triangles she was been part of as of this time (between her and Rachel for Finn, between her and Rachel for Puck, between her and Quinn for Puck, between her and Mercedes for Puck, between her and Artie for Brittany and between her and Sam for Brittany). Arguably, she's the Betty to Puck's Archie, with the more badass Lauren as Veronica.
She is also the Archie to Brittany's Betty and Dani's Veronica.
Brutal Honesty: In her array of insults towards others that have rubbed her the wrong way.
Goes even further in "Silly Love Songs".
"I just try to be really, really, honest with people when I think...that they suck!"
Bullying a Dragon: Picked a fight with Lauren over Puck. Lauren's about three times her size, and is the only girl on the wrestling team. It didn't end well.
But Not Too Gay: Became especially obvious when they titled an episode "I Kissed A Girl" and there were no girls kissing. Became such an issue that there was a massive backlash, compelling the writers to finally let them (complete with what was either a Take That Us or a really hypocritical aesop about double standards of gay Public Display of Affection).
Buxom Beauty Standard: When Santana comes back from class after summer break with considerably larger breasts, some of the boys take notice, with her having to tell Jacob My Eyes Are Up Here when she catches him eyeing her chest. But she doesn't get to enjoy the attention for long until it's outed that she didn't get a growth spurt, she got a boob job, which tanks her reputation.
Catfight: One with Mercedes over Puck, one with Quinn when she's allowed back in the Cheerios and takes Santana's spot as captain. The second one is especially vicious. *Slap* She also has to be restrained by about three people to stop her from taking Rachel out. Against Lauren, though, her luck runs out.
Characterization Marches On: In the very early episodes Santana was little more than Quinn's sidekick and was perfectly content with just being at her side.
Clingy Jealous Girl: She's very much against anyone dating Puck, even though she isn't actually with him anymore. Brittany/Artie doesn't go over well with her either. In "Pot O' Gold," she wasn't too happy about Rory's interest in Brittany either, even though there was no sign of it being returned.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: She occasionally acts as this for Brittany, though how much she actually needs it depends on the writer.
Coming-Out Story: Through seasons 2 and 3, Santana has to come to terms with her sexuality. First she realizes that her flings with Brittany are more than just that, then pushes her away when she doesn't break up with Artie to be with her and retreats further into the closet. Just as she starts getting her confidence back in the third season and is more comfortable with Brittany she gets publicly outted by Finn, the fallout of which also causes her grandmother to disown her.
Commuting on a Bus: Missed nine episodes of season 4, appeared in all but three episodes of season 5, seven episodes in the final season, then appeared for the final number of the series in the Grand Finale.
Cool and Unusual Punishment: Sue revoking her tanning privileges causes her to cry and flee the room.
Cruel Cheerleader: She is a cheerleader and quite slutty and bitch, though that turns out to be a front, so this is subverted.
Deadpan Snarker: Brittany is the only one safe from her vicious, vicious words.
Defrosting Ice Queen:
Exquisitely slowly, but definitely by the first season finale - though she's still a bitch, just somewhat more willing to show enthusiasm for the club.
"Sexy" goes a long way in terms of melting her down.
Disproportionate Retribution: Claims to have gotten the manager of Breadstix fired for trying to stop her from taking a wheelbarrow of breadsticks away from the restaurant.
The Dragon: Originally to Quinn as the Alpha Bitch, and then to Sue.
Dragon Ascendant: Succeeds Quinn as the Alpha Bitch; this has the odd effect of simultaneously making her the top dog among the school's girls, while also making her Sue's new Dragon (having previously just been a member of Sue's Quirky Miniboss Squad).
Fake Guest Star: In season one.
Femme Fatale: Is very attractive and also not someone to mess with.
Foreign-Language Tirade: "New York:" Convinced that Finn and Rachel's concert kiss cost them Nationals, she screams at Rachel in Spanish. She's so irritated about it that it takes Sam, Mike, and Quinn to keep her from ripping Rachel to pieces.
Freudian Slip: Famously in "Born This Way":
Santana: I've gotta gay— Go! I've gotta go.
Friendship Trinket: Her and Brittany can be seen in multiple episodes each wearing a friendship bracelet.
Gayngst: "Sexy" reveals that Santana is indeed gay and has only been in denial about it and her feelings for Brittany. Seeing what happened to Kurt only pushed her further into the closet. Finn outing her in "Mash-Off," though, just adds more of this.
Girl Posse: For Quinn, initially; after Quinn is dethroned as head cheerleader, she and Brittany become more of a double-act.
Girly Girl with a Tomboy Streak: Santana is very much a girly girl with her affinity for shopping, hair styling, tight dresses and cheerleading. However, she doesn't like the color pink and her mom says that she should have known she was a lesbian because of how she used to play in the mud and had a mullet.
Gold Digger: She breaks up with Puck in season one after seeing his credit score, claiming she needs financial stability from her partner. In an inner monologue, she mentions planning to marry a football player for similar reasons.
Hammerspace Hair: She keeps a phone in her hair, and also apparently razor-blades. Then again, it was a RAZR phone.
Have I Mentioned I Am Heterosexual Today?: "Your loss. Cause now I get the chance to write an awesome heterosexual song about Sam."
Kind of amusing considering how her standard answer whenever someone notices her closeness to Brittany is, "I am not a fan of labels."
Fridge Brilliance really since the personality she shows when she's with Brittany and the personality she shows when with others is dramatically different. Thus when those two parts occasionally collide, she has to balance out the two without weakening either side.
Heel–Face Revolving Door: Her level of attachment to the Glee Club is in constant flux.
Heel Realization: Her Anguished Declaration of Love to Brittany in "Sexy," where she admits that her cruelty is at least partly due to her turmoil over her feelings for her.
Hidden Depths: "Sexy" reveals that Santana isn't just a mean and spiteful cheerleader, but that she's also deeply and genuinely in love with her best friend and is terrified about what that means for her.
Hypocrite:
Santana constantly claims to 'keep it real' as an excuse for the snarky comments she throws at people, but is also deeply in denial about her sexuality.
Calling Quinn a slut in "Audition" is quite ironic coming from a girl who prides herself on her promiscuity
Hysterical Woman: When she's drunk, she becomes rather weepy.
I Just Want to Be Loved: Throughout season two there have been more and more indications that she's extremely lonely and jealous of other people's relationships.
Becomes something of a Harsher in Hindsight when, as of "Sexy", we realize this is because she feels afraid and lonely for being gay. Lonely because either people will bully her as they did Kurt or dismiss it as something being done to get a rise out of the guys. Jealous because the isolation makes it that much harder to have a serious relationship.
Informed Attribute: Her breasts really don't look any different most of the time post-surgery.
Intertwined Fingers: Santana and Brittany's signature pinkie finger link.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Uses her sass to help Kurt and Blaine stand up to Karofsky.
Karma Houdini:
Antagonism towards the rest of Glee Club.
Despite being a huge Jerkass to Rachel in "Special Education", not only is she not called on it by Will, he makes her the team's soloist at Sectionals.
She finally gets her comeuppance in "Silly Love Songs", when the entire Glee Club gives her a "Reason You Suck" Speech, then she later gets her ass handed to her by Lauren.
Subverted again in the first episode of season 3. When she leads the Cheerios in a sabotage of Glee club recruitment, Will kicks her out of Glee Club.
Subverted in "Mash-Off," when her constant harassment of Finn and Rory leads to Finn outing her in a crowded hallway.
Kick the Dog: She's regularly a bitch to everyone, but her spurning Brittany in "Duets" has often been called her worst moment; also, being especially nasty to Rachel in "Special Education".
Another candidate was her dumping Brittany in "The Break-Up". Despite the fact that Santana's barely had time for Brittany, Santana was the one who decided, under the pretense of an "energy exchange" with another student, to end the relationship, breaking Brittany's heart in the process.
Ladykiller in Love: A female version. After a lot of sleeping around with both boys and at least one girl, she realized that Brittany is all she really wanted. Just compare her reaction when Brittany touches her hand in "Pot O' Gold"◊ with her flippant attitude toward sex with boys.
Letting Her Hair Down: After she quits the Cheerios.
Light Feminine and Dark Feminine: The Dark to Brittany's Light.
Limited Wardrobe: Her cheerleading uniform. The only times we see her out of it is when she performs "Like a Virgin" in the Madonna episode and sleeps with Finn and whenever the kids do a group number in matching outfits. She even wears it on a date with Finn, despite having no reason to do so. After leaving the Cheerios, she starts dressing in normal clothes beginning with "Silly Love Songs".
Lipstick Lesbian: Her character arc during the later part of the second season clearly makes her this.
Manipulative Bitch: Convinced Brittany into having an affair with her behind Artie's back by telling her that it's not cheating since "the plumbing's different". There's also the incident were she literally borrows the germs of a student sick with mono (her promiscuity making her immune to "the kissing disease"), then kisses Finn because she knows he'll be kissing Quinn, thus making them both sick and making everybody realize that Quinn's been fooling around behind Sam's back. In the next episode, she convinces Sam to dump Quinn for her. But that's just prelude to her campaign for Prom Queen: she convinces Karofsky to date her and be each other's beards, and they start an anti-bullying patrol (not that hard since they alone probably account for half the school's bullying problems) to boost their popularity, getting Karofsky to convince Kurt to come back in the process. Even Kurt—the Glee Club's original schemer—had to give her props on this one.
Let's not forget her stated reason for wanting to be Prom Queen in the first place: She thinks that if she becomes Queen, she can convince Brittany that by royal decree, the two of them have to date.
In the fourth season, even after getting kicked out of Rachel and Kurt's apartment for harassing Brody, she goes to a hotel and sets up a sting that catches him red-handed as a gigolo, with Finn on hand to kick his ass.
Meaningful Name: Or meaningful misspelling; it's relatively common for discussion posts, and even an article in Entertainment Weekly to miss the first 'n' and spell her name as "Satana". In "Duets", Mercedes cast her ballot for herself and "Satan". Then there's this Australian promo.
Possibly unintentional, but Santana is the given name form of Santa Ana, Spanish for Saint Anna/Anne — the patron saint of Brittany, France.
The Mistress: She calls herself one when she secretly dates Brittany.
The Mole: Sue sends her, Quinn and Brittany into the glee club to keep eyes on what's going on there.
Morality Pet: Brittany is Santana's.
Kurt and Blaine also seem to have become something like this to her, seeing how she stands up for them to Karofsky and Sebastian, in "Night of Neglect" and "Michael", respectively.
Ms. Fanservice: She is shown in leather clothing, tight skirts and dresses, and dresses like a "slutty elf" for Christmas and a very fetishy candy-stripper uniform. She also gets a Lingerie Scene in season 4.
Named After Somebody Famous: Not confirmed, but it's frequently speculated that her name is a reference to famous guitarist Carlos Santana, especially since "Santana" is not commonly used as a first name (many fan fics give her a brother named Carlos, to further the joke).
Naughty Nurse Outfit: Dresses in one in "Silly Love Songs."
Odd Friendship: Santana, a self-identified "bitch" with a perpetually sour outlook, would on the surface seem to be the least likely companion for the generally sweet, goofy Brittany, but the two are virtually inseparable.
Old Shame: In-Universe. Her "Yeast-i-stat" garnered her a lot of attention in New York, to the point that several patrons of the diner she works at lost their appetites for bread after seeing her.
Opposites Attract: With Brittany. Santana is very intelligent, quite a realist and very sharp-tongued. Brittany is fairly gentle, a complete airhead and usually off in her own world. It's heavily suggested that these traits of Brittany's are what Santana loves about her.
Pet the Dog: Most of her more positive moments come from her friendship with Brittany.
Plastic Bitch: Santana starts Season Two as the head cheerleader and the most popular girl in school. However, the cheer coach discovers that she got a boob job over the summer so she can get more attention from guys. Her coach disapproves of underaged plastic surgery and demotes her from head cheerleader.
Really Gets Around: She's been involved with three of the five straight guys in New Directions, and has slept with Brittany as well. Remarked at one point that she found you had to have sex at least twenty times "before the feeling of accomplishment really kicks in."
That line takes on a new resonance with the revelation that Santana is gay, and her various relationships with boys were just a way of suppressing her feelings for Brittany.
She seems to be getting there with her female partners as well. After dumping Brittany in "The Break-Up", she ends up using a cheerleader to make Brittany jealous. The episode after that, she actually sleeps with Quinn. TWICE!
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Santana loves to deliver incredibly vicious ones. This is one of the reason you never ever want to get on Santana's bad side:
In "The Quarterback", Santana gives one to Sue Sylvester, calling her out on all the torture she's put them through and how rude she's been. Needless to say, it was pretty effective. Goes into Tear Jerker territory when you realize she's also railing at herself for her treatment of Finn.
In "Mash-Off", she harassed Finn and called him a fat, untalented failure. However, this little speech led Finn to fight back with the perfect question to hurt her, and had unforeseen consequences...
In season 6, Kurt spoke against Brittany and Santana getting married. Moments later, she confronts Kurt in the hallway. Rachel, knowing full-well this is going to get ugly really fast, wants to leave immediately, but Santana invites her to stay. What follows is undeniably her most crushing speech, pointing out all of Kurt's flaws, humiliating him, causing everyone in earshot to be completely stunned by what they are hearing, and left him absolutely speechless.
Relationship Reveal: "Brittana" went from being a non-canon ship to a sly joke to one of the more serious relationships on the show, culminating with their wedding.
Relationship Upgrade: With Brittany as of "Pot O' Gold." Arguably an Ur-Example, as Brittana went from background characters (and Quinn's flunkies) to one of the more beloved couples on the show, tying with Quick and Klaine for Beta Couple, and finally culminating with her wedding to Brittany.
Rich Bitch: Despite some posturing at being from "the wrong side of the tracks", we see she is clearly this in "Britney/Brittany" when she brags about the "great insurance" she gets from her doctor dad.
The Rival/Worthy Opponent: With Mercedes. They don't exactly get along at first, but they both admit that they respect one another's singing talents. Mercedes was even able to convince Santana to join the Troubletones on the basis of this.
Serious Business:
Don't come between her and Breadstix.
When Sue takes away her tanning privileges in Season 1, Santana breaks down in tears.
Small Name, Big Ego: "You guys love me. I keep it real and I'm hilarious!" Yeah, in-universe, no one actually likes her. Except Brittany.
Also shown with her talking up her supposed ghetto-ness and badassery (or going full "Lima Heights").
But due to the nature of the show, no one is actually sure what her background is, but it's clear that at least half the things she says about her awesomeness are blatant lies.
Spicy Latina: Santana is a temperamental Latina student who is initially known for her promiscuity..
Stepford Snarker: It seems her thorny exterior is a cover for her internalized homophobia and her fear of vulnerability. Finn certainly seems to think so, claiming that the reason she's so mean is because she's too scared to admit her feelings for Brittany.
Suddenly Bilingual: Fanfic writers routinely have her using Spanish words and phrases in casual conversation, but the character never showed any sign of familiarity with the language until "The Substitute", when she started yelling in Spanish while angry.
Although, her Spanish is quite flawed, confusing "orgullo" (pride) with "orgurro," and having a slightly Americanized accent. But it's understandable if she was born and raised in Ohio.
Suspiciously Specific Denial: In the early days of secretly sleeping together, she tells Brittany, "I'm not making out with you because I'm in love with you and want to sing about making lady-babies."
Technician Versus Performer: Discussed in the episode "Frenemies". While Rachel does have a natural singing talent, she’s been performing her whole and has had singing, acting and dancing lessons to refine those talents just as long, making her the technician. Santana however has had none of that, and only initially joined Glee Club to be a spy for Sue. Nevertheless Santana is can sing, dance, and act enough to be a considerable challenge to Rachel, enough to not only be quite a heavy hitter for the New Directions but also become Rachel’s understudy for Funny Girl on Broadway.
That's What She Said: Uses the word "wanky" to point out any Accidental Innuendo whenever she is in earshot of a conversation. It seems that the others are aware of the context the word's being used because they then snap at her to stop.
Token Evil Teammate: Can verge on this - she likes singing and dancing, and will admit to liking the club grudgingly, but she still takes great enjoyment in being mean to everyone in the group other than Brittany.
Transparent Closet: Played with, and eventually deconstructed. Her close relationship with Brittany is common knowledge amongst the members of New Directions and a lot of classmates, leading to a joke near the end of season 2:
Rachel: Look at the [newspaper rumours column].
Finn: 'Which prom queen candidate has been spending a lot of time in her closet lately?' That's ridiculous, Quinn's claustrophobic.
Rachel: (without missing a Beat) No, that's Santana.
However, around the same time Santana does become keenly aware of the rumours about her and recruits Karofsky to be her beard. Then in season 3 Finn publicly outs her, and when confronted about it claims that everyone already knows - and while it may not have been a surprise to the student body, the confirmation was enough to get her used as ammunition against Sue's congressional camapign and in turn outing her to the entire state, thus showing the clear difference between this trope and actually living openly as a lesbian.
Twofer Token Minority: Originally just a regular one-type minority later upgraded to twofer status due to her lesbianism. What's interesting is that she's the only ethnic minority on the show whose race is incidental to her character (save for a couple of throwaway lines in Spanish).
Used to Be a Tomboy: According to tales from her mother, Santana was a rough little tomboy very much departed from her girly and fashionable teenage (then older) self — her mother adds that wearing her hair in a mullet should have tipped her off to Santana being gay.
Vitriolic Best Buds: When she isn't being the Token Evil Teammate, she's being vitriolic to the rest of glee. As seen in one episode, though, its not because she hates them (she quit Cheerios for them after all), it's just because she's trying not to be fake and to be honest. Tends to be more vitriolic with the plot-relevant members like Quinn, Finn, and Rachel while more friendly and amicable with secondary characters like Brittany, Puck, Artie, and Mercedes. Sorta.
We Used to Be Friends: Season 2 threw some serious turmoil into her friendship with Quinn and her relationship with Brittany, though both seem on much better terms in Season 3. Worth mentioning that by Season 4 she and Quinn went back to slapping each other and making snide comments to one another even after season 3 gave them such good character growth and sorted out their issues with one another. And then they flirted with and eventually slept with each other. To be fair, the general consensus was Season 4 was a giant OOC-fest for all parties involved.