Alliterative Name: Susan / Sue Sylvester
Arch-Enemy: She hates Will’s guts (mostly) and is constantly trying to bring both him and the Glee club down. Apparently part of her hate-on for him is that she hates men with curly hair. This is Sue though, so take that with a rather large grain of salt.
The Artifact: One of the bigger complaints about Season 2, was the fact that it seemed like the writers were running out of ideas for Sue's character. She had her ups and downs, but remained a very enjoyable character of the show.
Attention Whore: Sue wants all the school's and all of Ohio's attention to be on her.
Ax-Crazy: At her worst, Sue is not above physical violence when she doesn’t get her way. She has reputation of pushing people down the stairs and once punched out a Regionals judge for choosing the New Directions. There’s also the time she almost shot Brittany out of a canon and the rampaged through the school when she was prohibited from doing so.
The Beard: A variant - Sue is straight, but enough people mistake her for gay due to her butch mannerisms that she feels the need to get a boyfriend to deflect suspicion.
Berserk Button: Don't you dare say the R-word, especially not about anyone who has Down syndrome. Finn Hudson learns this the hard way. Disrespecting anyone with Down syndrome at all immediately gets you on Sue's sh-t list.
Bifauxnen: Sue in a Zoot Suit, that is all.
Big Bad: The main antagonist of the series, being a constant thorn in New Direction's side. Even temporarily sidelined by others baddies, or involved in an uneasy truce, her shadow still looms.
Breakout Character: The most popular character in the series. She wasn't even in the original outline, and was only added when a network executive said there should probably be a villain. And even then, she wasn't planned to be a regular until another project of Jane Lynch's fell through.
Break the Haughty: She is a master at recovering from her defeats, but when karma bites her in the back, the results are explosive. Family is also a sore subject for her, her relationship with her mother being strained at best, she had to protect her sister during their childhood who was bullied because of her Down syndrome (and who died during the show, leaving Sue devastated), and her baby also has Down syndrome.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Her Cheerios routines are extremely awesome, all things considered.
But Not Too Evil: Sue is suppose to be an offensive and non-PC person. Doesn't stop viewers from getting personally offended when she says something not nice, like commenting about Quinn being manic depressive.
Byronic Hero: As of Season 5. More heroic than the clueless Will, in any case...
Camp Straight: Despite her many butch attributes, Sue fell for three different men and was implied to have a fling with a fourth, but no women. Though her marriage to herself - obviously a woman - does complicate things. She also outright admits in her monologue in "I Kissed a Girl" that she's straight, discussing how despite fitting various lesbian stereotypes, she's really only attracted to men.
Sue: Why would someone assume I'm a friend of Ellen? Just because I'm mannish, and highly aggressive, and have short hair, and I only wear tracksuits, and I coach a girls' sport, and I married myself... It just doesn't make sense!
Catchphrase:
"Do you think this is hard? Try [Refuge in Audacity], That's hard!"
"And that's how Sue C's it".
"HORROR!!!
"Outstanding!"
"Let me break it down for ya."
"Now get the hell out of my office."
Changing Clothes Is a Free Action: In "Rumours" she starts dressed as David Bowie, cut to a flashback and back, and she's now Ann Coulter. Immediately lampshaded by Terri
Cool and Unusual Punishment: Sue is the master at dealing them out at mere whims.
Comedic Sociopathy: The very basis of her character. She performs unbelievable acts of petty cruelty, and sometimes outright felonies, all Played for Laughs.
Commuting on a Bus: Barring one appearance, was absent from Episode 14 of Season 5 until the first episode of the final season.
Cruel to Be Kind: As mean-spirited as she can be at times, it's usually done with the best interests at heart. Sometimes...
Deadpan Snarker: One of the biggest ones of the show, along Santana.
Death Glare: She loves to give these, though most of the time they are overly dramatic and are played for comedic purpose. The one time she gave a genuinely chilling death glare (when Finn called her baby retarded) was very disturbing, to say the least.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Sue gradually underwent this throughout Season 3.
Depending on the Writer: Can vary from a Jerk with a Heart of Gold to an out-and-out Jerkass, depending on what episode it is.
Disproportionate Retribution: As you might have guessed, Sue has obviously dabbled in this once or twice.
Double Standard: Rape, Female on Male: She slips Figgins a roofie and uses photos of their forced tryst as blackmail against him. This is never treated as anything other than comedic. It is strongly implied that nothing actually happened, as she was fully dressed.
Dramatic Drop: Sue's overreaction to the Glee students using the photocopier.
Drill Sergeant Nasty: Puts her Cheerios through the wringer, with outlandish, fiendishly difficult and sometimes outright dangerous training regimes. Seems to work given her year-long winning streak.
Driven to Suicide: After her Humiliation Conga (see below), she attempts to commit "Sue-icide" (Though this was actually a feint.).
Enemy Mine: Happens occasionally.
She has an absolute hatred towards bullying (since her disabled sister was the target of it, and ironically she became quite a bully herself), which led her to team up with Will on some occasions, including season 6, when she is in on Will's plan to teach Vocal Adrenaline a lesson (and get back at them after what they did to Sheldon), and unleash her (real) hounds on them after having slashed the tires of their bus.
Forms one with Roz Washington, her Cheerios coach replacement, to educate the Glee club girls about domestic violence not being a joking matter.
Even Evil Has Standards:
In "Journey", Sue was absolutely disgusted when the judges screwed over New Directions at Regionals simply because they lacked the flare (which in one case meant outright sucking up to the judges) of the other competitors.
In "Furt", Sue, who is a bully herself as well as a victim of bullying (due to her disabled sister), takes Kurt seriously and resigns as principal in protest of Karofsky being able to return to school.
She and Roz Washington set up a proper teaching lesson about domestic violence to Santana, Brittany, Tina, Mercedes, and Sugar after hearing them joke about Beiste's new black eye. When Beiste reveals that was actually what happened, Sue offers Beiste to crash at her place for a while.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
While Sue can be mean to pretty much anybody, the one person she shows absolutely no malice towards is her older sister, Jean, who was born with Down Syndrome. Her death in season 2 crushes her greatly.
She's a Mama Bear to her daughter Robin, also born with Down Syndrome.
Outside of family, Becky is the one she deeply cares about. She goes to great lengths looking after her, particularly because Becky reminds her of her sister Jean.
Evil Is Bigger: As played by the 6'0" Jane Lynch, Sue towers over almost all of the student characters, and even some of the adult men.
Evil Laugh: With confetti cannons, too.
Fabricated Blackmail: After being fired, Sue drugs Principal Figgins and takes pictures of the two of them in bed together. She uses this to get her job back. To drive home how staged the whole thing is, Sue pulls back the sheets to reveal she is fully clothed.
For the Evulz: Fundamentally Sue's reason for functioning, breathing, and existing. For example, in "The Substitute":
Sue: My first order of business: destroy Glee Club.
Will: I thought we were friends?
Sue: Yeah, that got boring.
Glamorous Single Mother: From what we've seen from her house in previous seasons, she has no trouble supporting her daughter financially, and she regularly uses Kitty as a babysitter, which makes it seem a little odd when she says to Millie Rose in "Glee, Actually" that "we single parents know how tough it is". When you remember that Robin has Down's syndrome, though, it may lead to...
Good Is Not Nice: After her Heel–Face Turn in season 3. For a given value of "good".
Heel–Face Revolving Door: Sue is basically this, depending of the circumstances and mostly what amuses her the most at the moment between helping or antagonizing New Directions.
Heel–Face Turn: In "Funeral", she says she's going to stop going after the glee club and start making the world a better place for disabled people like Jean... Then subverted. She tries to be nice, but by the start of the next season she is attacking not only New Directions but every show choir in America, then done straight: by the halfway point of season 3, Sue makes it her mission in life to get New Directions named national champions. She develops a very adorable Good Cop/Bad Cop and Vitriolic Best Friends routine with Will. However, she has a tendency to change sides on a whim.
Hidden Heart of Gold: Sue has a soft spot for the disabled and people who get bullied, though she is rather selective about that, since she is a bully herself and while she wants to protect gay people, she isn't as tolerant towards transgender people (see her treatment of Unique).
Hoist by Her Own Petard:
This is what led to her temporary suspension in "Sectionals" after the leaked setlists with her letterhead and handwriting were delivered to Figgins's hands.
Her plan to win a Local Emmy by doing a scathing expose on Glee's production of The Rocky Horror Picture Show is derailed when she accidentally convinces Will to cancel the show.
Her torturing of the club in the time leading up to Regionals inspires them to write the song that gives them the win.
She gets Quinn, Santana, and Brittany to join the club as moles. Finding that they enjoy being around people who support and care about them, they decide to stay. Sue has a pretty poor track record with her evil plans, doesn't she?
Hollywood Atheist: Sue's an atheist, and although she has valid reasons, her behaviour certainly doesn't make her an endearing example.
Humiliation Conga: The entire third act of "The Sue Sylvester Shuffle." Quinn, Santana, and Brittany quit the Cheerios, Sue loses Nationals for the first time in seven years, is somehow voted Biggest Loser of the Year, and the rest of the Cheerios' budget for the year goes to New Directions.
Ice Queen: Cold as the Arctic and in complete control.
Instant Web Hit: Sue's "Physical" music video in Bad Reputation.
Implausible Deniability: Sue in "Sectionals", after Figgins confront her leaking the setlist and all the increasingly damning amount of evidence pointing at her, to which she replies with ludicrous lies completely straight-faced.
It's All About Me: To Sue, the world must revolve around her and her alone. She hates the Glee Club so much because it takes the spotlight (and budget) away from her and her Cheerios.
Jack Bauer Interrogation Technique: At prom when she tries to get Artie to tell her who put him up to spiking the punch. She never got around to actually pulling his teeth out, though, thanks to a fight Finn started in the gym.
Jerkass: Sue is a real ass to everyone, except people with disabilities. During season one, every time she is hit with Laser-Guided Karma, she ultimately ends up benefiting from it. She has no qualms about doing unforgivable and illegal things as long as it serves her interests.
Jerkass Has a Point: In trying to sack Will while Principal. Will is clueless enough to think that singing songs about date-rape and twerking on stage with underage minors is a good thing. Or having the entire Glee club spend a week walking around in Lady Gaga costumes just the week before. No real-life teacher would get away with such antics... and that is just within the first five weeks of her reign! And a week later, when Will asks for $600 for Nationals costumes. Sue says no unless Will can explain how he can afford all of the costumes for their mid-episode dances, such as Artie's $1,000+ "Lady Gaga airbag" from three episodes ago, and yet not afford money for the Nationals costumes. Will doesn't give us an explanation...
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Has proven on several occasions that she actually has a pretty big heart.
Karma Houdini: Even though she gets setback or occasionally taken down a peg, she's so far avoided any real consequences for her worst actions, which would have landed her in jail. Generally, it's an Acceptable Break from Reality. Without Sue, the show wouldn't be half as interesting.
Kick the Dog: Sue enjoys doing this so much that if it were a sport, she would be the gold medalist. In "Funeral," she kicks Becky off the Cheerios because she reminded her of her own sister Jean, who'd died the day before. She gets better.
Kindly Housekeeper: Not her, but she keeps one named Imelda around.
Leitmotif: The show seems to use "O Fortuna" as one for her. It almost always plays during one of her rampages...which is often.
Limited Wardrobe: Her track suits.
Little Sister Instinct: Towards her older sister, Jean. Being born with Down Syndrome and with neither of their parents around, Sue took it upon herself to look after her sister and loves her unconditionally.
Lonely at the Top: Flat-out stated in "Funk"
Mama Bear: Gives a truly impressive Death Glare to Finn in 4.05 when Finn calls her baby daughter (who has Down's syndrome) "retarded".
Mistaken for Gay: In-universe, during Sue's campaign for Congresswoman, one of her opponents tries to make it seem like Sue is gay because she's unmarried and because she appointed a lesbian, Santana, as head cheerleader. However, as we've seen in her previous dalliances with men and as she confirms in the following episode, Sue is actually straight. As mentioned above (see The Beard), this apparently happens to her often.
Mommy Issues: Explored in "Furt".
Morality Pet: Her sister and Becky. Also, Kurt to a degree.
Nice Job Fixing It, Villain!: She does EVERYTHING to get Blaine and Kurt back together. She succeeds. And looks very pleased with herself. And, officially, becomes beloved by almost all fans.
The Nicknamer: Rarely calls the kids by their real names.
In "Throwdown", she addresses the minority students as "Santana! Wheels! (Artie) Gay Kid! (Kurt) Asian! (Tina) Other Asian! (Mike) Aretha! (Mercedes) Shaft! (Matt)"
In "Furt", when Kurt asks her to stop calling him 'Lady', she offers him a choice of three alternatives: Gelfling, Porcelain, and Tickle Me Doe-Face. (He goes with Porcelain.)
Again in "Extraordinary Merry Christmas", when she calls Artie, Kurt and Blaine into her office. Blaine seems upset when she at first calls him "Other Gay", but seems pleased when she rectifies this by calling him "Young Burt Reynolds". She later also dubs him a shaven Tom Selleck.
Subverted when it comes to fourth-season newcomer Marley Rose, who simply doesn't have very many negative/extreme/racial points that Sue can make fun of at all. In that respect, Sue freely admits that she hasn't thought of a name for Marley at all, but when she tries a few seconds later, all Sue can manage to do is compliment her. Though, given the bulimia disaster, you wouldn't be surprised if you later heard Sue call her something along the lines of "Vomit Factory!"
Obviously Evil: By now, the Glee kids really should have stopped taking any advice she gives them.
Ominous Latin Chanting: "O Fortuna" is used to hilarious effect during the Sue vs. Will scenes in episode 7. And again during her rampage in the Superbowl episode. And again in Glease...
Pet the Dog:
All of Sue's actions in Episode 9, really: reading Little Red Riding Hood to her sister, accepting Becky into the Cheerios despite her disability, treating her no differently than the other members of the squad, donating money to build three new wheelchair ramps in the school...
In "Journey" she manipulates Principal Figgins into giving Will and New Directions another year because she respects the relationships he has with his students. Besides, what would she do without an enemy?
In "Furt" she promises to keep an eye on Karofsky in case he harasses Kurt again, and has him expelled as soon as the death threat comes to light. She also resigns as principal partly due to the school board overruling her expulsion of Karofsky.
In "Glee, Actually", she sells a valuable Christmas tree to a toothpick factory and leaves the money at Marley's house so Marley's mom can pay for her daughter's therapy. She also leaves them a bunch of presents, something they would otherwise have had to miss out on in order to put the money towards Marley's treatment. She may have also been responsible for buying the tree, since Marley's mother had decided to forgo getting one, as it costs $50.
Pretend Prejudice:
It varies, but Sue spews an incredible volume of invective at just about every conceivable group, while at the same time not really treating those groups markedly different from anybody else (her chief cheerleader/minion is Latina and a lesbian, she recruited Kurt (gay) and Mercedes (black) onto the team without a problem). She basically just seems to be a misanthrope who will use any insult at her disposal. Occasionally, she's been shown to have a much better understanding of privilege than Will "We're all minorities!" Schuester.
Sue is the living embodiment of the Competition Theory of racism: she doesn't feel any actual prejudice towards any group, but she will exploit whatever edge she can get, whether it be race, gender, sexuality, disability, anything. If dissing someone for being gay will give her an edge, she'll use it. If dissing someone for being prejudiced against gays will give her an edge, she'll use it. If an opening for dominance exists anywhere, Sue will use it.
Psychopathic Womanchild: Though she might think otherwise, Sue's melodramatic behavior, pathological need for control, petty rivalry against a group of teenagers and tendency to throw violent tantrums paint a picture of a person whose mental age lags far behind their physical age.
Reasonable Authority Figure: During her short tenure as Principal. Also has shades of this trope throughout the series, but to a more subtle extent.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Sue tends to perform utterly epic ones whenever she can. She delivers probably her most spectacular one yet to Will in season 6, pointing out just how a self-centered, hypocrite and creepy guy he has been in many occasions, denouncing his blatant favoritism of some kids over the others, the fact that he never thanked the band who has always been there to help him and the Glee club (truth is, he doesn't even know the names of the musicians), and the fact that he was a mediocre language teacher (who accepted not one but two "teacher of the year" award despite not speaking a single word of Spanish!).
Refuge in Audacity: Her standard modus operandi.
Romance and Sexuality Separation: She mentions that, although she finds men sexually attractive, she despises speaking with them too much to be interested in romance.
Running Gag: Whenever Sue gets really frustrated and furious, she destroys everything in her path like a wild demon, while O Fortuna plays in the background.
Sadist Teacher: To the point where it gets physical. From her brutal yet efficient ways of training the 'Cheerios' cheerleading squad, to the way she throws things around and almost throws a kid out of a corridor when she's angry in one episode. She has her reasons for this - bullying someone for being different seems to be her own Berserk Button. Although she ruthlessly terrorizes the school, she is very much an equal-opportunity bully, and the kids know it.
Salt the Earth: Sue actually salted the earth in her backyard when she sold her house.
Screw Yourself: She tried to marry herself in "Furt". It may or may not be legal...
Serious Business: Domestic Abuse. Sue is the first person to sling an offensive joke, but she will not tolerate students making light of spousal violence. Period.
She Cleans Up Nicely: In "Puppet Master", both in a fantasy sequence and in reality.
Ship Tease:
In "Funk" they really tease the hell out of the Sue and Will ship.
Their dance to "Sing, Sing, Sing" was kind of adorable, too.
The Belligerent Sexual Tension kind in "Child Star". She's probably trying to intimidate Will with getting her face this close to his, but it looked a lot like Almost Kiss. Not to mention, their newest feud emerged from Sue making about Will something that she'd originally brought onto herself from the third party. Her inability to go too long without picking on him with no reason sometimes appears like a Villainous Crush.
Shipper on Deck: Is revealed to be a fanatical Klaine shipper. Terrifyingly fanatical! We're talking Saw here! Complete with her own Jigsue!
Small Name, Big Ego: Subverted; though Sue has won national cheerleading competitions for X amounts of years in a row, gives interviews, and said to have written a book (in "Journey"), Sue is still a teacher and (as Olivia Newton-John says) "lives in Ohio!"
Smug Snake: A definite defining characteristic of Sue. The problem in her case is that she often has a reason to be smug, as she is indeed often in control of any situation she is in and does not only masterfully plays her part, but often comes in top in any confrontation she has. What’s worse, she seems to relish in the effect her smugness has on others.
Stalker Shrine: Yes, she has one, though chances are you will be stunned when you discover who it is dedicated to: Klaine. She shipped Blaine and Kurt, hoping that she would be the flower girl at their wedding. She even goes as far as to try to make them come back together in season 6! And it works!
Stealth Insult: Sue, being Sue, manages to sneak one to Will in her rendition of Vogue on "The Power Of Madonna".
Strawman Political: Early on, she tended towards being a Straw Conservative. This has been toned down, particularly since the beginning of the "Back 9" of Season 1; she's subsequently acquired a couple of Straw Liberal traits, and a bunch of randomly crazy ones that don't really relate to any ideology. Maybe the writers realized the inherent contradictions of being comically self-centered and Strawman Conservative and a union public-sector worker.
Straw Feminist: Not usually, but from time to time Sue will react with something like "Nobody would oppose this if I were a man!" when someone opposes to one of her (objectively insane and in no way gender-related) ideas.
Taking the Heat: During the episode "Shooting Stars", a gun is fired (twice) inside the school, which cause a general panic. She confesses to Will, Shannon and Figgins that it was her gun which was fired accidently, when she was cleaning it, and she accepts the consequences of her actions (namely, getting fired)... Except that she in fact covered for Becky, who brought a gun to school in order to protect herself, and who accidentally fired it when giving it to Sue.
Team Mom: Gradually grows into (an albeit begrudging) one of these for New Directions. She will deny it to her deathbed, but she has a soft spot in the blackened husk replacing her heart for them.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: Tomboy to Emma's Girly Girl.
Took a Level in Kindness: She mellowed out of her evilness in some seasons, becoming a bona fide ally of Will and the kids. However, drama dictates that she must become an antagonist again when the time comes, every time someone does something she perceives as an insult. And she really just loves to do this For the Evulz.
Torture Technician: She threatens to pull Artie's teeth out during "Prom Queen".
Totalitarian Utilitarian: Her attainment of the permanent position as principal leads to what could best be described as a reign of terror. That said, her commitment to making the students live in fear of her wrath while enforcing a strict academic curriculum has boosted McKinley's rankings to a level putting it on par with elite private schools like Dalton Academy.
Tritagonist: When she isn't The Antagonist.
Unsportsmanlike Gloating: Sue is a master at this and relishes in rubbing it in the face of her opponents
"I am engorged with venom, and triumph."
Victory Is Boring: At least part of the reason (and the main reason that she'll admit to) that she helped the glee club in the first season finale. What would she do without Will to push around? She even told Becky on Swan Song after getting the keys to the choir room after New Directions lost Sectionals that she had a strange empty feeling.
Villain Song: Sue's version of "Vogue". Also "You're a Mean One, Sue the Grinch," and "Bitch."
Villainous Rescue: In "Journey", Sue manages to secure another year for New Directions even after they didn’t place at Regionals.
What the Hell, Hero?:
Sue, of all people, calls Will out thrice: once on his treatment of his minority students, once on his treatment of disabled students, and once on relying on gimmicks rather than trusting in his kids. Amazingly enough, she's totally right.
Two of those are rather debatable, particularly the disabled one - Will assumed that Sue had some sort of sadistic ulterior motive, which is completely justified given what he knows about her.
When She Smiles: Most of the time, Sue is only smiling when she's acting smug, and when all is going according to her plan. In "Glee, Actually", following her Pet the Dog gesture, the Glee club decides to sing a Christmas song to thank her. Her smile during the last seconds of the episode is incredibly heartwarming.
Wild Card: While in Season 1 she was focused on hating and destroying Will and the club in Season 2 it's become almost impossible to predict what she'll do next, why or how.
Woman Scorned: When she has problems in her love life (as evidenced by "Mash-Up"), she takes it out on everyone around her.
Worthy Opponent: Eventually sees Will as this.
Younger Than They Look:
In "Vitamin D", Sue wrote in her diary that she's turning thirty soon, which means she's only twenty-nine, or in deep, hilarious denial.
She also claims to have participated in Operation Just Cause in 1989, so it seems that denial would be more likely.
She claims to have been involved in My Lai, putting her in her early 60s, if not older
Mercedes even caught her in a lie about her age when she realized the math just didn't add up.
In Funeral Sue states that Jean (her older sister) was over 50 at the time of her death, making it likely that Sue is quite a bit older than her stated age of 30.
So, in this case at least, Sue is an Unreliable Narrator.
There are so many instances of the math of her age not adding up (examples not mentioned here include, but probably are not limited to, claiming having been a teacher for 20 years in 1.02 and having frozen her eggs in the 70s in the third season, the first of which would make her 40+ and the second 60+ years old), that it can well be considered a Running Gag.