Advertised Extra: Much of the time. You can definitely tell that the writers progressively lost interest in the character the further into development and production the series got, especially when other popular characters started to emerge.
Ambiguously Jewish: Tina might not be Ambiguously Jewish - the name might just be a tribute to the actress playing her, Jenna Ushkowitz, an Asian-American with a pretty Jewish-sounding last name. Then again, who knows?
Beta Couple: In the first season, the Tina/Artie coupling could be considered the Beta Couple for Finn/Rachel, Quinn/Puck and Will/Emma and there is no doubt that, in comparison, they are a far more stable couple. In the second season, it's Mike/Tina that's the most stable couple in the series - they've been together for the entire second season, with their problems being quite minor in comparison to, say, Will/Emma or Finn/Rachel.
Big "NO!": Lets out one in "A Katy or a Gaga" after Will tells New Directions that they'll be up against Throat Explosion.
Butt-Monkey: Probably one of the most egregious examples. Notably, most of her solos end up interrupted, either by her bursting into tears or by outside circumstances.
Character Development:
Very quietly, in the background of the series, Tina has shed much of her shyness, gained a voice and considerable (if sometimes slightly shaky) confidence, and turned out to be a very good dancer. It's even started to earn her actual plots.
In fact, her whole history on the show was basically summarized during the beginning of season 3 episode 20 "Props", with Sue even lampshading it by asking "Isn't she the one who used to stutter?"
Covert Pervert: Seems to have a bit of this going. She seems quiet and introverted, but it's implied that she first took an interest in Mike because she couldn't resist his abs, and in the fourth season a montage showing her developing crush on Blaine prominently features a scene of Tina very intensely staring at his ass when he's bending to pick something from the floor.
A Day in the Limelight: Finally, in season 3, we get an episode that gives Tina an actual plot. And it's awesome.
Deadpan Snarker: In Seasons 4 and 5.
Dude, He's Like, in a Coma!: Blaine, who has a cold, falls asleep on his bed when they're studying together. She unbuttons his shirt and puts on some vapor rub. It came off a little bit creepy, considering that Tina was very obviously crushing on Blaine.
Eating the Eye Candy: Basically how her relationship with Mike began, as shown in a flashback during the season 2 premiere. To be fair, it's hard to pay attention to what you're doing when there's a shirtless guy with amazing abs dancing around you.
Elegant Gothic Lolita: Her initial aesthetic, especially in season 2. She drops the look entirely in season 3.
The Heart: Established as this in "Props", though she doesn't accept it until the end of the episode.
Kick the Dog: While her disappointment over The New Directions losing Sectionals in Season 4 is certainly understandable, she really could have been nicer to Marley about it. Telling her "It's all your fault!" was pretty cold, especially considering that Marley was A) Suffering from a legitimate and very serious psychological condition and B) The victim of cruel manipulation by someone she believed was a friend. Add to that the fact that Marley was, in all likelihood, mentally beating herself up for failing the team and this comes off as Jerkass behavior of the highest order.
Obfuscating Disability: Her stuttering was an act she originally developed to avoid having to do an oral presentation.
Offscreen Breakup: Her breakup with Mike in between Seasons Three and Four takes place offscreen.
Once Done, Never Forgotten: People still occasionally made jabs about Tina putting vapo-rub on Blaine's chest while he was passed out.
One-Steve Limit:
Averted. She and Mike both have the last name "Chang" (hyphenated, in her case), with no indication they're related. Additionally, there's a Vocal Adrenaline member named Andrea "Cohen."
Lampshaded in "Extraordinary Merry Christmas", where the Star Wars-themed opening introduces them as "Mike Chang and Tina Cohen-Chang, no relation!"
Perky Goth: Started out as one. Lampshaded in episode 20: "Even though I'm painfully shy and obsessed with death, I'm a really effervescent person!"
Prom Wrecker: Is on the receiving end of this from Bree, who dumps red goo on her. Why? Because Bree didn't like that another Glee club member became Prom Queen.
Prone to Tears: Other than Santana, Tina cries more than any other member of the cast, a trait that is Flanderized to the point of breaking down at the slightest provocation.
Satellite Character: To the point where her boyfriend Mike, who literally started as an extra, ended up with more stories dedicated to him. From "Props" onwards, she begins to actively rebel against this role.
Shrinking Violet: Initially, she's extremely shy. She grows out of this over time.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Tina's romance with Artie, the most easygoing and one of the most good natured member of the Glee Club, might have some foundations in this... Except their relationship ended up being pretty troubled (especially in "The Power of Madonna"), and she eventually dropped him for Mike at the start of season 2.
Throwing Off the Disability: In "Wheels", Tina reveals to Artie that she's been faking her stutter to avoid people, and wants to stop. Artie takes it badly.
Token Minority Couple: With Mike, which apparently blossomed when they were both counselors at "Asian camp." It was constantly lampshaded, such as when Mike suggested for them to go to Asian couples therapy.
Took a Level in Jerkass: In season 4.
Artie: It's time you heard this. The whole school's been talking about it. Everyone's convinced that sometime between junior and senior year, an alien invaded your body and made you shallow and desperate.
Tsundere: In season one, we saw mostly the dere-dere side, because Tina was so shy. In season two, we're getting more of the tsun-tsun. Poor Mike and Artie are not happy about it.
Twofer Token Minority:
She's Asian and Ambiguously Jewish to boot!
Her having a stutter would have also qualified if she hadn't thrown it off halfway through Season 1.
Unlimited Wardrobe: While her clothes might not be as stylish as Kurt's, sometimes they are just as elaborate.