Aesop Amnesia: One episode has everyone telling Will that the other members of his Glee club have more merit than just being glorified backup singers and living props. The episode ends with yet another performance starring Finn and Rachel.
Berserk Button: Will has admittedly tolerated trouble from other people, including his wife. But when he finds out that his wife was faking her pregnancy, he just fucking blows up...
Betty and Veronica: An interesting case, as if we analyze the case closely he could be considered to the Betty or the Veronica to Ken, who would become the opposing force depending on what you consider Will to be.
Beware the Nice Ones: Will is beyond furious when he confronts Terri about her fake pregnancy.
Camp Straight: A mild case. Shelby Corcoran wonders if he's gay, and a few other characters have teased him for his interest in show tunes.
Catchphrase: "From the top!"
Chick Magnet: Female characters hit on him regularly. Weaponized by Will in "Funk."
Commuting on a Bus: Took seven episodes off in Season 4, but his longest absence, barring one appearance, was from Episode 14 of Season 5 until the first episode of the final season.
Cool Shades: Well Emma thinks so, commenting that 'sunglasses are so sexy' after seeing him wearing them.
Cool Teacher: His students certainly think so, and to his credit, he looks out for them, and goes out of his way to look out for their interests.
Deadpan Snarker: Could have his moments of this, like in "Funk" when Sue rails on him about humiliating her:
Will: Well gee Sue, I wonder where I learned how to do that.
Did Not Get the Girl: Subverted, in that Emma and he get together but float apart and around each other for the first two seasons.
Drill Sergeant Nasty: Slips into this a few times, most notably with Mercedes at the start of season three and with Marley during the Katy vs. Gaga week assignment.
George Jetson Job Security: Despite being a public school teacher and thus presumably unionized, he apparently has this, as Sue fires him while he's on sick leave.
High-School Sweethearts: Will and Terri have been together since they were fifteen. Unfortunately, it's not a happy marriage
Hot Teacher: Will is very attractive, leading to a number of characters being attracted to him, including tow of his students.
Informed Ability: How much Spanish Will actually knows and can speak, which is strange, considering he's the Spanish teacher at McKinley.
In the episode "The Spanish Teacher", it turns out he doesn't know much at all, and only took the position because it was the only one available.
Similarly, we have his ability in regards to handling his students. The first scene of the series (arguably his Establishing Character Moment) is him driving into school and seeing a group of football players crowding around Kurt, who is paralyzed with fear and looking towards Will. Instead of, you know, doing anything to stop this, he asks "making some friends, Kurt?" After Puck replies in the affirmative, and Will walks off, the jocks throw Kurt into a dumpster.
Not to mention he does absolutely nothing about all of the slushies that get tossed in the faces of his Glee kids.
Nor does he do anything about everyone in the club making fun of Rachel for one reason or the other. He doesn't even bat an eyelash when they talk about causing her physical harm, such as when Quinn tells her that she wants to punch her in the face when she talks. Teachers are supposed to take threats like that seriously even if they aren't meant that way.
It's All About Me: He has a very troubling tendency to make things about himself and do bad things if they benefit him. Examples include planting drugs on Finn, hitting on Emma after promising Carl he wouldn't, using the Glee Club to put on shows to impress Emma, and stealing Finn's letterman jacket.
It's the Journey That Counts: Will states this in the aptly named "Journey" to New Directions just as they are preparing to go out and perform at Regionals.
Karma Houdini: Will completely gets away with planting marijuana in Finn's locker to force him to join the team in the pilot. Though when he tells Finn what he did in the season 3 finale, Finn laughs it off and calls him "the coolest teacher ever."
Kick the Dog: Considering that it was Will, not Puck, who took Finn's letterman jacket, this line.
Will: If you did, all I'm going to say is that we all want some piece of Finn to keep close to us.
Love Dodecahedron: Terri-Will, Holly-Will, Shelby-Will, Emma-Will, Carl-Emma, Ken-Emma...
Love Hurts: During his confrontation with Terri, Will tears up.
Manipulative Bastard: For such a Nice Guy, Schue really is capable of pulling off some underhanded deeds.
Manly Tears: At the end of "The Quarterback". And how.
Mistaken for Racist: Part of Sue's campaign against Will is to get all of the minority kids into her own section of the glee club.
Mr. Fanservice: There's quite the number of comments on Youtube videos of his Don't Stand So Close To Me/Young Girl mash-up about how cute/sexy Will is. To say nothing of his renditions of "Creature of the Night" and "Blurred Lines".
Nice Guy: When the writers feel like writing him as such, Will is an exceptionally kind and friendly person.
No Accounting for Taste: Considering how selfish, whiny and manipulative Terri is, it's hard to understand why Will fell for her the first time.
Ominous Latin Chanting: "O Fortuna" is used to hilarious effect during the Will vs. Sue scenes in episode 7.
Only Sane Man: ...most of the time. And similarly, Only Sane Employee.
Out-of-Character Moment:
Will's furious reaction to finding out about the faked pregnancy. It’s precisely how far that is from his usual personality that makes it so chilling.
Smashing the Cheerio's trophy when Sue tries to house it in the chorus room. He probably would have preferred to smash it over Sue's head if he could have gotten away with it.
His eerily calm "You dropped your trophy, Sue" just makes that moment even more frightening.
Out of Focus: In season 3, possibly in response to the fandoms' response to his storylines in the second season.
Papa Wolf:
A subtle one, but in "Funk", after Will stops the guys from Glee getting revenge on Vocal Adrenaline for their horrible treatment of Rachel. Kurt demands to know if Will is letting Vocal Adrenaline get away with it. Will, face cold and in Tranquil Fury mode, answers "no" and proceeds to call Jesse with Rachel’s phone. Will invites Vocal Adrenaline to see New Directions perform, which they do (blasting a funk number out of the park). Lesson learned? Do not go after one of Will's Glee kids.
During the "school shooting", he risks his life to find Brittany who is in the bathroom.
Parental Substitute: It appears as if Will is shaping up to be a father-figure for Finn, considering his father died when he was just a baby. Finn outright confirms this in the Season 1 Finale. Will shatters Finn's perception of him as a father at all when he tells Finn he thought he was pathetic after he dropped out of the military and returned to Lima. They sort of resolve their issues near the end of Season 4, only for Finn's death to ruin any more plans for the father/son/mentor/successor to the glee club relationship to develop further. Despite having kept a strong face in the weeks immediately following Finn's death, Will ends up stealing Finn's letterman jacket and completely breaks down in Emma's arms.
Poke the Poodle: On his way out of Sue's office after she steals all the gifts for the homeless children, he unhangs her telephone.
Pretty Fly for a White Guy: Will is very, very white, his favorite song is "Bust a Move", he raps "Gold Digger", likes Poison, and breakdances.
Reasonable Authority Figure: Most of the time, he's a pretty reasonable—if lax—teacher.
Rousing Speech: In "Journey" Will gives a rather emotional one the New Directions shortly after they learn that Sue would be one of the four judges at Regionals, stating that as a group they have grown and changed so much, and for the better and that no matter what happens in the future, he believes and loves them too much to let them fall at the wayside.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Is the musical, attentive Sensitive Guy to gym coach Ken's Manly Man
Ship Tease: In "Funk" they really tease the hell out of the Will and Sue ship. Their dance to "Sing, Sing, Sing" was kind of adorable, too.
So Proud of You: One could argue that Will is always proud of his "children", as seen in his facial expressions every episode. However, quite possibly the two most touching instances of this are in "Sectionals" and in "Journey".
Stupid Sexy Flanders: In the aforementioned "Funk". He was able to seduce Sue by some butt-wiggling to music despite the fact she loathed him.
Team Mom: Schue is a rare male example, as he holds them together, keeps an eye on their emotional well-being, and acts as a mentor to many of the students.
Took a Level in Badass: All of Episode 12. Will finally confronts Terri about her fake pregnancy, rips her fake baby bump off, stops taking her bullshit, and walks out on her, all while proving that Will can actually act. Later on, after Will endangers Glee Club's chance of going to Sectionals by sleeping on a mattress they received from a commercial spot, Will takes the bullet for the team so they can still go to Sectionals; just without him.
Vicariously Ambitious: Everyone in the Glee club knows that one of the reasons he's so passionate about them achieving his dreams is because he never managed to.
Waistcoat of Style: Wears waistcoats or sweater vests so much that Santana thinks he's addicted
What the Hell, Hero?:
Emma calls Will out on his "slutty" behavior - cheating on Terri with her, having April stay at his house, and making out with Shelby - in front of the entire faculty. Also the end of "The Power of Madonna" where he is angry with Kurt and Mercedes for joining the Cheerios. At some point before this episode, three of the six girls in Glee (Quinn, Santana and Brittany) were already on the Cheerios and all of the guys but Artie were on the football team. All of a sudden he has a problem with Kurt and Mercedes trying to get solos for themselves.
Half of his lines in "Special Education" are this, calling out the club on their selfish behavior and his own failings as a fair director.
Played with when he lectures Puck on stealing Finn's letterman jacket... It could very easily be interpreted as Will attempting to convince himself to give the jacket back to Santana by the end of the episode. He doesn't.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Will is very optimistic about his kids achieving their dreams, and wholeheartedly believes in them.
Worthy Opponent: Sue considers him one at the end of the first season, which is why she forces the principal to give the Glee club another year, even though they didn't place at Regionals. Properly refers to him as one in New Directions.