The Ace: Sisko is an Action Hero, Guile Hero, and Science Hero of the highest caliber rolled into a single Starfleet uniform. He can beat Klingons in a fist fight, navigate through high-stakes interplanetary crises, and build starships designed to kill the Borg. If you want to tangle with him, you'd best bring a couple of armadas.
Almighty Janitor: Ends up supervising and occasionally even participating in grand strategy meetings among the heads of state of great powers, despite himself never being promoted higher than Captain. On paper he is a captain. In practice, he is a full admiral.
Ascend to a Higher Plane of Existence: At the end of the series Sisko is ascended into the celestial temple for an unspecified amount of time. Emphasis on "unspecified": the Prophets are non-linear beings outside time.
Kasidy: When will you be back?
Sisko: It's hard to say - maybe a year, maybe... yesterday. But I will be back.
This was a change from the planned But Now I Must Go ending, due to Brooks wanting to avert the Stereotype of a black man abandoning his son and pregnant wife. He returns in the Expanded Universe books of the Star Trek: Deep Space Nine Relaunch.
Attack Pattern Alpha: For some reason, he's a big fan of "Attack Pattern Omega." It's treated as a hit 'n run attack in Star Trek Online.
Arch-Enemy: To Gul Dukat. While there are those with personal animosity towards Dukat, Sisko is the one figure Dukat takes a personal interest in defeating. This is largely due to the fact Sisko has his old job, works in his old office, and is worshiped by the Bajorans which is something Dukat craved. Dukat takes a great interest in opposing Sisko at every step of the way.
Authority Sounds Deep: Even when he's being introspective, he speaks with a noticeably deep, authoritative voice.
There was one scene, from "Facets", that had to be reshot because Avery Brooks spoke in a whisper so low that it creeped everyone out.
Badass Boast: In "The Way of the Warrior", Chancellor Gowron threatens to attack the station, causing Sisko to warn him that he's in over his head.
Sisko: I can assure you, this "old cat" may not be as "toothless" as you think. Right now, I've got five thousand torpedoes armed and ready to launch. If you don't believe me, feel free to scan the station.
Badass Creed: In "In the Pale Moonlight", he reflected on how his father used to boom, "Worry and doubt are the greatest enemies of a great chef!"
"The soufflé will either rise or it won't; there's not a damn thing you can do about it, so you might as well just sit back and wait and see what happens."
Bald of Authority: Sisko looks far more badass once he goes bald. And for good reason too. Sisko was one of the major leaders of the entire Federation fleet in open war against the Dominion.
Bald Head of Toughness: He is shown to be more willing than Picard had usually been to get down and dirty in the trenches. In "The Way of the Warrior", he begins to transition into a wartime commander as the Klingons turn hostile, starting with him fighting to defend Ops against a Boarding Party along with his crew. He intimidates even Worf.
Q: You hit me. Picard never hit me.
Sisko: I'm not Picard.
Becoming the Mask: At the start of the series, Sisko isn't comfortable with being regarded as the emissary of the Bajoran Prophets, presenting himself as just another Starfleet officer as best as he is able. Over time, however, he grows more comfortable with being the emissary, and in time, even embraces it; from officiating Bajoran weddings to referring to the Prophets as "Prophets" instead of just "wormhole aliens". By the end of the series, he's become the most Bajoran human in all of Starfleet, planning to build a home on the Bajoran homeworld and fully embodying his role as the emissary.
Berserk Button: Betraying Starfleet and The Federation, as Admiral Leyton and Michael Eddington learned the hard way.
The Big Easy: He hails from New Orleans, and is the son of a creole chef. Joseph Sisko still operates a restaurant there.
Blackmail: How he usually keeps Quark in line or gets him to do something for the good of the station. Usually leads to "Blackmail" Is Such an Ugly Word, but admits it outright when he's fed up enough.
Quark: You begged me to stay here when you first came on board, and I did, against my better judgement.
Sisko: I didn't beg, I blackmailed you.
The Blacksmith: Sisko is a sci-fi version of this archetype. He's not The Engineer (that title very clearly goes to Chief O'Brien), but in a world where replicators can instantly create most small items, he nevertheless has a fondness for making things with his own two hands. Besides being a talented chef and starship designer (having been involved in the creation of the Defiant-class), he has built a mechanical clock and a working light ship on his own and was planning to build his own retirement home on Bajor before events made houses unnecessary for him.
Bruiser with a Soft Center: Sisko kept his emotions veiled while on duty. He tends to loosen up and act warmer around family or officers of near-equal rank.
Byronic Hero: Sisko's personality gradually became a more downplayed example the longer the series went on and the more his burdens grew, compared to how he was at the start of the series, especially after he was hit with juggling the dual massive responsibilities of being The Chosen One and a wartime leader during the Dominion War.
The Caligula: Possessed by the mental influence of one in "Dramatis Personae".
Captain Smooth and Sergeant Rough: Sisko is pretty fierce in own right, but he's more likely to treat you to a Death Glare and then storm out because he has more important things to do. That's when his Doberman (Kira) comes into the picture.
The Chains of Commanding: Sisko felt these more keenly than most Trek Captains. Like Picard, he later warmed to his crew, particularly Kira whom he invited to watch a baseball game with him. On the other hand, he did lead his men in several suicide missions.
Character Tics: Touching the back of his neck when he's caught out or embarrassed; pinching his earlobe when bemused; patting a fist against his palm (like a baseball glove) when pondering something.
Chef of Iron: Had he not joined Starfleet, Ben would probably still be tending the kitchen at Sisko's. His father Joseph ran his restaurant in a way similar to Picard's vineyard: He eschews replicated food, believing it lacks the flavor of a quality meal.
Joesph Sisko: I trained you to be a chef. Lot of good it did me.
Chekhov's Skill: Ben has memorized long strings of statistics from the greatest 20th century baseball players. This came in handy when trying to make small talk in 2024 A.D. ("Past Tense")
Child by Rape: He's the child of a relationship that was non-consensual, but the Prophets are to blame, not his parents. His mother was possessed by the Prophets and forced into a relationship with the unknowing Joseph. After Benjamin was born, the Prophets released her and she, understandably, left Joseph and Ben. No one was particularly broken up when they learned this.
The Chosen One: Being the Emissary. So much so that the Prophets arranged for his birth! As the Emissary to the Prophets, "The Sisko" has a destiny to fulfill, many trials to face, and an important role in Bajoran theology and prophecy. He was anointed as such due to a prophecy that the Emissary of The Prophets would return from the Celestial Temple healed by the Prophets. Sisko qualifies by getting over his emotional trauma over being violently widowed with pressing by the Prophets trying to understand why he "exists here" (in their nonlinear perspective) in the moment of his wife's death, and emerging from the Bajoran Wormhole.
Cold Ham: Mirror Sisko doesn't yell much, but is extremely hammy nonetheless, enough to rival Mirror Kirk.
Commanding Coolness: For three seasons.
Companion Cube: His baseball. He toys with it whenever he's thinking and, when the Dominion retakes the station, leaves it in his office as a message that he is going to come back. When he takes it with him on his leave to Earth between seasons 6 and 7, Kira sees it as a sign that he doesn't know if he'll return.
Like all Trek Captains, Sisko was extremely fond of his ship and felt devastated when the Breen destroyed it.
Competition Freak: He gets a little emotional over coaching baseball. Usually an understated performer, Brooks' capacity for ham is on full display in "Take Me Out to the Holosuite" — both toward his own team and Odo, who is refereeing. (He even delivers the stereotypical 'Are you blind?!' tangent by accusing Odo of regenerating instead of calling the game.)
Sisko: You are finished! Gone! Off the team!
Rom: ....I can't play?
Sisko: That's the smartest thing you've said all week. You. Can't. Play. Now GET YOUR GEAR, Get Out! OF HERE!!
Contrasting Sequel Main Character: Where Picard was the quintessential Officer and a Gentleman, being content to look at the big picture in a given situation, while Sisko is much more of a front-line officer, and is more willing to get his hands dirty and deal with problems directly. Notably, Sisko is also the first Star Trek protagonist with a family (he's a widower and a single father), meaning that he's also far less stoic and objective than Picard, and is more likely to get emotionally involved in situations since he knows that he has a son to protect, and because he had to endure losing his wife in a previous battle. Picard is a hardline atheist while Sisko ends up becoming deeply religious. And while Kirk and Picard were idealists who took the high road whenever possible, even when it cost them, Sisko will reluctantly Shoot the Dog if he has to if it's the least costly way to get the job done. Even personality wise, where Picard started out a stern, cold mannered and logical man, he gradually became warmer, kinder and embraced his emotions over the years, where Sisko started out a kinder and more emotional sort and ended up becoming colder, sterner and more logical as the years went on and his responsibilities grew.
Crystal Dragon Jesus: The Emissary is a messiah figure in the Bajoran religion.
Cultured Badass: Sisko strikes an even keel between Kirk's passion (not to mention speech patterns) and Picard's sophistication. He loves fine cuisine, early American history, and can belt out a jazz standard improv if you toss him a mic.
Dark and Troubled Past: For the first episode at least. The Prophets help him get over it (giving him his life back, as was prophesied) when he teaches them the nature of linear existence and they make him explain why he keeps living in his own "past" if the point is to move forward.
Dating Catwoman: His relationship with Kasidy Yates when she turns out to be running supplies (medicine and food according to her) to the Maquis.
He also slept with both Intendant Kira and (an unjoined) Jadzia from the Mirror Universe.
Deadpan Snarker: Usually as the prelude to a severe reprimand.
Deal with the Devil: In the episode "In the Pale Moonlight", he basically gives a geneticist a ton of biomemetic material (the Trek equivalent of tactical nukes) that could be used to make biological weapons, all in pursuit of an encrypted data rod which is vital to his plan, but can't be replicated. In the end, the rod was just a lure to kill the Romulan senator and his aides. Garak didn't tell him that, because he knew Sisko might agree to one or two clandestine killings, but no more. In the end, though, Sisko can live with that too.
Death Glare: The most intimidating glare in Starfleet. If you get this from Sisko, you are royally fucked.
Desk Jockey: For a short time during season six, Admiral Ross makes him his adjutant on a starbase. Jadzia acts as the captain of the Defiant in his stead.
Determinator: In the episode "Paradise", Sisko and O'Brien are trapped on a planet by an Evil Luddite. She offers Sisko water if he will only take off his uniform. After a night in the punishment box, she offers it again, and Sisko's response is to put himself in the box.
Double Meaning: Sisko's title of "Emissary" can be read two ways. The more common Emissary from the Divine aspect. And the other, that he is the material world's Emissary to the Prophets, being the one who made them aware of the world outside the wormwhole, and their role in it.
Did You Just Punch Out Cthulhu?: The only being to knock Q flat on his ass and get away with it.
Q: You hit me! Picard never hit me!
Sisko: I'm not Picard.
Q: "No...*slyly* You're much easier to provoke."
Important detail to note: Q never came to DS9 again after that episode. Though that was likely less out of fear, and more out of Sisko being "boring", while Janeway off in the Delta Quadrent was much more interesting. After all, Q had already shown how easily he could get even a powerful flagship like the Enterprise killed when he booted them off into Borg Space back in TNG
Divine Parentage: In a complicated way. His mother was human... but was possessed by a Prophet at the time. Once the possession wore off, she ran and left his father Joe heartbroken.
Emissary from the Divine: Sisko's role for the Bajoran religion and wormhole aliens.
Emotional Bruiser: One of the toughest beings in the Alpha Quadrant, and he's not afraid to let his feelings show, from a hearty belly laugh with his friends to a Death Glare at someone who pisses him off to openly weeping over the death of someone he cares for.
The Engineer: A minor example. After Wolf 359, Sisko worked at the Utopia Planitia Fleet Yards, building, among other ships, the Defiant.
Establishing Character Moment: Probably his most iconic moment from early on came a few episodes in, when Q shows up, starts causing trouble as usual, and eventually ends up challenging Sisko to a fistfight. Sisko decks him. When Q protests that Picard never hit him, Sisko simply says "I'm not Picard," firmly establishing that on this show, things worked differently.
Fan of the Past: He had an interest in history. He collected models of old Starfleet starships and ancient African art, was very knowledgeable about 21st century history and his hero was James T. Kirk.
A Father to His Men: Throughout the series, Sisko shows great concern for the people under his charge. He stresses to Worf the importance of knowing when to smile and keep morale up, even when it's the last thing he wants to do. This often entailed inviting his senior staff to home-cooked dinner in the Ward Room.
Adm. Ross: They're a good crew.
Sisko: (visibly moved) The best.
This extends to the well-being of the Promenade Merchant's Association and the Bajoran refugees under his roof. From day one, Sisko did his best to keep the station's shops, school, and restaurants in business, even donating furniture to Quark after he's audited by the Ferengi homeworld. When a prideful (but obviously relieved) Quark demands a "storage fee" for the new barstools, Sisko foots the bill.
The Force Is Strong with This One: Several Bajorans have sensed that his pagh is particularly strong.
Four-Star Badass: What he basically ends up becoming as time goes on. Officially he is just a captain, but in practice he is not. He is involved in grand strategy, manages thousands of people, is involved in dealings with heads of state and commands multiple fleets. Most real life admirals don't have a fraction of the influence Sisko ends up having.
Friend to All Children: He actually enjoys the company of children and puts top priority on keeping his workers' families together. He kills two birds with one stone by appointing the recently-unemployed Keiko O'Brien as the head of the station's new school. This lowered the possibility of DS9's children from being sent off-world, and just as importantly, convinced his Chief of Operations' wife not to return to Earth with their daughter. Later in the series, a bemused Sisko acquires his own Tagalong Kid in Nog.
Game of Nerds: He's such a fan that he uses it as an allegory for linear time and existence — in the first episode!
Genius Bruiser: Brooks described his character as "a quick thinker, but also a deep thinker," which is mostly on-target. Following the debacle at Wolf 359, Sisko found an outlet for his rage at Utopia Planetia, where he oversaw the design and construction for the USS Defiant.
A God I Am Not: Well, in his defense, he's only half-god.
Good Is Not Nice: Not if it's pushed, anyway. It's possible that Starfleet sensed this and decided that only Sisko had the stomach for the Bajoran assignment.
Good Parents: Subverting the usual archetype of Starfleet Captains. Sisko is one of few characters in the franchise (see also O'Brien) with a stable family life.
Guile Hero: He has a reputation for fighting, but he's also very good at worming his way into the enemy's confidence: manipulating the Jem'hadar when they take over the ship and have guns pointed at his head, or palling around with Verad Dax like it's old times (before phasering his body-snatching ass to kingdom come). Sisko also successfully posed as Gabriel Bell in the 21st century. This meant both convincing a roomful of people that he's an on-the-edge thug and his trigger-happy boss that it was in his interest to spare the hostages.
Heartbroken Badass: His wife is killed in the beginning of the pilot episode. It takes him a two-year time-skip and an encounter with the Prophets to start getting over it.
He Who Fights Monsters: Did some shady shit that that would have gotten even Kirk court-martialed and sent to a penal colony for 30 years. As did Admiral Ross and Luther Sloan on Romulus.
Hero Insurance: In the episode "For the Uniform", Sisko decides to use Eddington's idea of poisoning atmospheres against Cardassians, and orders an anti-human version to be used on a Maquis planet to force Eddington's surrender. Essentially this did no physical harm to either side and just forced them to swap planets, but as Starfleet had already taken him off the case for making it personal you'd think they would have followed up about this. Bringing in the infamous turncoat Eddington may have gotten him significant leeway.
Heroic Sacrifice: He tackles Dukat off of a cliff into the aptly-named Fire Caves, although the Prophets grab him.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He was this close to his mentor and best friend, Curzon Dax. Then Curzon died and Dax became Jadzia Dax, with whom he was still Heterosexual Life-Partners, to the point of still calling her "Old Man". Then came Ezri Dax, who was a neurotic mess after an unexpected Joining that she had never prepared for, and they were Heterosexual Life-Partners again, only this time he was Dax's mentor.
Homegrown Hero: The prophesied hero of the Bajoran religion is an American from New Orleans.
Hypocrite: A mild example in "Trials and Tribble-ations". He admonishes Dax for wanting to meet with Koloth as her interaction with him could have unforeseeable consequences on the future and Sisko wants to limit his crew's interactions with the people of the past to only the absolute minimum required. The last thing he does before they return to the 24th century? Personally meets with Captain Kirk and gets his autograph.
Iconic Item: Partway through Season 1, an alien impersonating one of Sisko's favorite baseball players gives him a ball a a parting gift. Sisko keeps it on his office desk throughout the rest of the series and sometimes toys with it. When the Cardassians take over the station at the end of Season 5, the fleeing Sisko leaves the ball on his desk as a warning to Gul Dukat that he'll be coming back.
I Will Fight Some More Forever: Surrender to the Dominion? Not on his watch! Bashir is lucky the Captain didn't feed him his own iPad at that suggestion.
Immigrant Patriotism: When young Jake groaned over having to move to Bajor, Ben pitched it as a vacation. Privately, though, Sisko wasn't happy about the assignment or the effect it was having on his son, and considered transferring back to civilian service. Through his interactions with the Bajoran people — most notably Major Kira — Sisko slowly grows to love Bajor. By Season 5, wild horses couldn't drag him away from that station. Note also that he begins wearing traditional Bajoran clothes during his off-hours. Ironically, Sisko does help recruit Bajor into the Federation as promised, but actually ensures that they won't - yet. This turns out to be the right decision, as it allows Bajor to remain neutral and more-or-less unscathed through the Dominion War. In the end, Sisko talks of retiring from Starfleet to live on Bajor, suggesting that his time on the station has converted him from a steadfast promoter of the Federation into something else. Bajor is not of the Federation, but "Sisko is of Bajor."
Important Haircut: Sisko grows a goatee and loses the buzz cut after he's promoted. It's around the same time the series started to get dark.
It Sucks to Be the Chosen One: From a world-weary Starfleet Commander on the verge of insubordination to the Emissary of the Prophets, an iconic figure of the Bajoran worldwide religion. It may not look like much and Sisko himself didn't realize what it meant at first. But Kira reveals in Accession he had absolutely no idea of the immense power he got into his hands, especially considering how incredibly pious the Bajoran people are. To put this into perspective, it is also implied in this episode Bajor would have known a planetary war if both Emissaries decided to fight for the title; you could see it early on when it was an even split between Bajorans enraptured or off-put by the call to return to the D'jarra. Worse still are the personal sacrifices demanded of him by the Prophets themselves, and being pulled throughout the series between whether he should be a Starfleet officer or the Emissary, trying to juggle both roles, with the latter one eventually winning out in the end.
It's Personal: Eddington.
"He played me, alright - and what is my excuse? Is he a changeling? NO! Is he a being with seven lifetimes of experience? NO! Is he a wormhole alien? No! He's just a man, like me, and he BEAT me!"
The Kirk: He will act on his emotions, sometimes to the degree that It's Personal, but he's also able to see all sides of an issue and weigh the choices between what feels right and what will be best in the long term.
The Knights Who Say "Squee!": Sisko admitted to some fanboy glee at breathing the same air as James T. Kirk, but nonetheless ordered his squad to stay focused on their mission. The episode ended with Sisko getting Kirk's autograph (Kirk thought he was signing a crew complement list). To be fair, the temporal investigators he was relaying the story to (who absolutely hated Kirk for all his time travel violations) said they would have done the same in Sisko's situation.
Kung-Fu Jesus: Word of God cites Moses as an inspiration for Sisko's story.
Like Brother and Sister: He and Dax tease each other like old friends, friends who one has just got the body of a young woman, and he jokes the new body will take some getting used to.
Limited Advancement Opportunities: While he does get promoted to Captain, the amount of responsibility he's given makes that laughable. By the sixth season he's commanding fleets in battles; by the finale he's the de-facto supreme commander of the allied forces and still doesn't get an admiral title.
The Lost Lenore: Jennifer Sisko, who gets wasted in every universe, including the series pilot and in the Mirror dimension. She never had much in the way of personality, even when alive.
Manly Tears: Demonstrated in the very first episode. Reliving the memory of your beloved spouse dying would be enough to make anyone cry. WHILE having to explain to a being that doesn't understand linear time, why you cannot leave this moment. Notably happens again later in the series after a Pah-wraith takes over his son's body.
Messianic Archetype: Communicates with the gods of Bajor and is their representative in the corporeal realm. Safeguards the Bajorans. Sacrifices himself against the Antichrist—oh, and the gods also engineered his birth.
Mighty Whitey: A for obvious reasons rather unusual version of this trope. But ultimately, in a way he does play it straight since he turns out to be a religious Messiah-like figure for another race he (as the representative of the Federation) has basically taken under his wing beforehand; i.e. he's basically a sci-fi application of the trope where the human become the most awesome and heroic figure taking a leading role for a native non-human species; and even though this trope is usually applied to white characters, apart from this particular detail it's pretty much the same.
My God, What Have I Done?:
In "Heart Of Stone", Sisko has this written all over his face when he forces Nog to admit the reason why the latter is applying to Starfleet: Nog is ashamed of his father and wants to do better than him, although he has to buck every single aspect of his heritage in order to do so.
The entire episode "In the Pale Moonlight". He records a log entry attempting to come to grips with his actions, justifying all the evil he committed by telling himself that it's for the greater good.
Nervous Tics: Seen more frequently in early episodes, when Benjamin is nervous he scratches the back of his head just above his neck.
No-Nonsense Nemesis: Sisko may be a gentle man and peaceful diplomat of the highest order, but if you ever get to the point where he considers you a 'nemesis', he will hunt you down to the ends of the universe and raze entire planets to smoke you out. And that is not a bluff.
Non-Indicative Name: Everyone calls him "Emissary", yet when he actually acts like one, it backfires. More information on the trope page.
Noodle Incident: Pelios Station. Apparently, something happened there involving Curzon, Benjamin, and a table dancer, but Ben's embarrassed enough by the story that whenever it's brought up in public he shushes Dax.
Not So Above It All: Despite ordering his crew to remain focused on the mission in "Trials and Tribble-ations", he all but squees when telling Dax how much he wants to meet Kirk, and later sneaks onto the bridge to get the man's autograph before they return to the future.
Sisko is also more than willing to indulge in ship wide gossip amongst the officers.
Offscreen Moment of Awesome: Between his stint as First Officer of the Saratoga and being assigned to command Deep Space Nine, he was responsible for designing the Defiant-class starships.
Parents as People: He has a tough time raising Jake, but does a pretty good job of it anyway. He has a similar relationship with his own father, Joe Sisko.
Platonic Life-Partners:
With Jadzia Dax. He was also very close friends with Dax's previous male host Curzon. Less so with Ezri because she was so much younger than him and had so much trouble adjusting to the joining that they almost swapped roles with Sisko becoming Dax's mentor.
Subverted when he traveled to the Mirror Universe. Where apparently he had sex with the alternate (Dax-less) Jadzia in order to maintain his cover as the alternate Sisko...
Politically Correct History: This irritates him; it's one of the reasons he doesn't initially care to try out the Rat Pack era casino simulation. It was Deconstructed in that same episode when Kasidy offers a different perspective: it's not the way it was, but it is the way it should have been.
Pragmatic Hero: The threat of the Dominion War makes Sisko more and more this trope as the series progresses. Season 6's "In the Pale Moonlight" is a particularly glaring example.
Punctuated! For! Emphasis!: Has a tendency to do this whenever he gets angry. For example, this dialogue from "Rules of Engagement"
"Isn't! It! Possible! That the ship! He! Saw! was sending out false! Sensor! Images!
Rank Scales with Asskicking: He's the highest ranked officer on Deep Space Nine and kicks more ass than any other Captain in the franchise. Takes on several Jem'Hadar on the ground, and also leads several of the fleet battles. He was a star wrestler at the Academy and, in a pinch, knows his way around the bat'leth (presumably he trained with Curzon); imagine the look of surprise on that Klingon boarding party when he swipes a bat'leth from their fallen comrade and goes to town on them in "The Way of the Warrior". Oh, and he's also the only person in the history of the franchise to punch Q to the floor. Among military buffs, Sisko is regarded as the most believable military officer in the franchise.
Rank Up: Following three years of overseeing DS9, Sisko is finally promoted to captain. Despite this, Sisko oddly remains a captain despite being given responsibilities and commands that would normally be entrusted to a flag officer. By the end of the Dominion War, he speaks to Vice Admiral Ross, a superior who outranks him by three full grades, and the other Allied leaders as an equal.
Reasonable Authority Figure: For the most part. Just don't cross him or make him angry.
Reassigned to Antarctica: It's implied that his posting to DS9 was this. Considering that the station and Bajor were considered to be a backwater area for the Federation, combined with his initial wish to be anywhere else, Starfleet probably sent him as a last ditch effort to revive his career in a place where he could do no real damage. Turned into a positive example of a Reassignment Backfire.
Real Men Can Cook: A highly competent war leader with nerves of steel... who also makes a pretty fierce jambalaya, if his son can be trusted. His aubergine stew ain't half bad either.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: Blue to Kira's Red. Sisko tends to be level-headed though he often shows more emotion than your average starfleet captain. Kira is... intense, by comparison.
Religious Bruiser: To the point where his faith in the Prophets even surpasses Kai Winn's.
Renaissance Man: Sisko does have quite a wide range of talents and interests. But then, being Renaissance Men is more or less the Federation's hat (at least since Star Trek: The Next Generation).
Resigned to the Call:
Sisko drags his heels all the way to his new assignment on DS9. It's a miserable job, and no one wants it. He quickly changes his tune after convening with the Prophets, who restore his hopes for the future. In addition, the discovery of the wormhole in the first episode (and the station's relocation to the Alpha-Quadrant entrance of said wormhole) turns Deep Space Nine into a hot location overnight.
Being the Emissary in general also turns into this, what with all the religious ceremonies that he has to take part in and everything else that comes with the job. "Accession", however, changes that viewpoint.
Retirony: Sisko plans to build a house on Bajor once the war is settled with. He survives, but on another plane with no way of knowing when exactly he'll be back.
Scary Black Man:
Robert Picardo admits that he was nervous to step onto the show and start being rude to actors like Avery Brooks because he was scared that the intimidating Captain might rip his head off and shit down his neck.
This guy can intimidate Worf, a claim that few beings in the galaxy can make. He plays this to the hilt in "For the Uniform", when he orders biogenic weapons to be launched at a Maquis settlement to get Eddington to surrender.
Sisko: Commander, launch torpedoes.
[Worf stares at him in shock]
Sisko: Commander, I said launch torpedoes!
In the third episode, he has to deal with Kira interrupting an admiral's staff meeting to complain about Sisko's methods. Big mistake.
Sisko (smiling politely): Go over my head again, and I'll have yours on a platter.
Second Love: Kasidy is Sisko's, after Jennifer, who was killed in the pilot (at Wolf 359).
Shell-Shocked Veteran: He begins the series still traumatized from the Battle of Wolf 359 and the pilot is about him coming to terms with it. Later on, during the Dominion War, he's shown to be on the verge of a nervous breakdown several times from the stress.
Smart People Play Chess: Several times throughout the series.
The Stoic: Sisko might just be the most inscrutable of Star Trek's leads.
Stop Worshipping Me!: Feels this way about being the Emissary initially, but mostly keeps it to himself. He stays rather humble about the position even after he accepts it as part of his identity.
Suddenly Shouting: Sisko getting pissed about something and switching from his Barry White whisper to his trumpety high voice when yelling. Noted in the series, as he regularly sees Bashir for his sore throat.
Sisko: YOU BETRAYED YOUR UNIFORM!
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: This is owning to Brooks' nuances as a performer, switching from serene Shatnerese (picked up during his Shakespeare days) to the bulldog ferocity he was known for on Spenser: For Hire. He also got plenty of tender moments with Kassidy and his son, as well.
Team Chef: He claims his dad taught him everything he knows, and his dad is the owner and operator of a restaurant, so in a 24th century where cooking is mostly a hobby, he's a hobbyist (and a good one, we are told).
Timey-Wimey Ball: His entire existence. Since the Prophets exist outside of linear space-time, their first meeting with The Sisko took place relatively speaking before they'd sent their prophecies to the Ancient Bajorans about the Emissary. To ensure that that meeting took place, they sent one of their number to engineer his very birth. Furthermore, it's very likely that the Prophets began influencing Bajoran society due to meeting Sisko, making him somewhat culpable for most of Bajoran history... and thus the reason he first arrived at Bajor to begin with!
Tranquil Fury: It's scary how quickly that tight-lipped smile can turn into a glower.
Trauma Button: In the pilot, he’s unable to move from where his wife was killed, constantly replaying that trauma, and sees Picard as a reminder, until he heals a bit and apologises.
Twerp Sweating: While it was Ben's decision to move his family to Bajor, he does lose sleep over the unsavory company Jake is cavorting with. Instead of uncovering his son's girlfriends' weak points to exploit, though, Sisko winds up learning that Jake writes poetry and is quite a hustler.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: Both Sisko and Jadzia have admitted that they're attracted to each other, but agree that acting on it would be really weird given Sisko's relationship with the previous Dax. As he puts it, "She may not be Curzon, but she's still DAX!"
He does sleep with her mirror-universe counterpart while posing as their Ben Sisko though; an unjoined Jadzia was that Ben's mistress, and he had to maintain his cover when she threw herself at him after all...
Verbal Tic: He does the same shifting between slow and pronounced and speaking very fast speech patterns that Kirk/Shatner did. Sisko is the Commander of a particular Dysfunction Junction, as well as a father, so it makes sense that he’s trying to figure out what to say.
Villain-by-Proxy Fallacy: A rarity in how he views this of himself during "In the Pale Moonlight".
Sisko: I am an accessory to murder(...) I think I can live with it.
Vision Quest: Like Picard and Janeway, this Captain was outwardly skeptical but highly curious about the spiritual and arcane. He embarked on a couple such quests in his career: a trip through the Orb of Time helped heal his psychic wounds left behind from the USS Saratoga; and a long desert trek ended with the revelation that he was part-Prophet.
War Hero: After the battle to retake Deep Space Nine from the Dominion, he is awarded the Christopher Pike Medal of Valor. This is referenced a few episodes later when his old Academy nemesis Captain Solok shows up and needles Sisko by saying he had received that award twice.
The Watchmaker: The only lasting impact of "Dramatis Personae" is the addition of an abstract-looking clock in Sisko's Ready Room. The clock (built by Sisko while possessed by a mad alien king) symbolizes the non-linearity of the Prophet's existence and the way they perceive time. It's included in the background of several episodes.
Warrior Poet: Can sometimes ruminate on this. See in "In the Pale Moonlight".
Warrior Therapist: Becomes this when confronted to Dukat's psychosis in "Waltz". He probably aggravated it in the process as the Cardassian was still in denial at the time but at least, it got him a chance to escape.
We Will All Be History Buffs in the Future:
Another one of Sisko's interests is history. He collected models of old Starfleet starships and ancient African art. He loved exploring Bajor's monasteries, and once rebuilt a solar-powered "lightship" using mostly materials available to the ancient Bajorans (he added artificial gravity because he didn't want to deal with a zero-gravity environment, but that was a minor addition).
He was knowledgeable about civil rights reforms, which came in handy when he was accidentally zapped to dystopic San Francisco in 2024.
He was uncomfortable with the Vegas holo-program at first, as black people in the sixties could never be customers in a place like Vic's lounge. This is a reality Sisko experienced first-hand, as Benny Russell, in "Far Beyond the Stars", which may have been based on Sisko's prior knowledge of the civil rights movement.
Wrestler in All of Us: He used to be captain of the Starfleet Academy wrestling team, which comes in handy when you need to beat up a slightly-drunken Klingon. Of course, even that can't help overpower a Vulcan, as he learnt at one point in his youth...
Working-Class Hero: Unlike Kirk or Picard, Sisko isn't from a big family or a prodigy in the Academy, he's just a son of a chef who worked his way up the ranks. He also has a son to think of, so he can't afford the kinds of emotionally detached, high-minded idealism of the other two Captains. Compounding his problems is that he's unable to just jump to warp to avoid the fallout of his decisions, which means he has to work with his team instead of just ordering them around, while regularly dealing with a deluge of civilians and independent operatives clamoring for his attention.
Wouldn't Hit a Girl: He half-jokes about this whenever Dax manages to piss him off. He'll comment, "If you were still a man..." while knowing perfectly well that even if she isn't in her nineties, Dax could still easily wallop him.
You Will Be Beethoven: Takes on the identity of Gabriel Bell, an early 21st century civil rights crusader, after the real Bell is killed confronting an angry mob that was attacking Sisko and Bashir. Sisko subsequently does everything that Gabriel Bell was credited with, with his image taking Bell's place in the historical record.◊
You Wouldn't Like Me When I'm Angry!: Sisko struggles to keep a tight lid on his temper, to the point where he comes across as incredibly mellow. To the contrary, he confesses that he often entertains thoughts "unworthy of a Starfleet Officer." For an example, see "A Time to Stand" when Sisko receives news of the decimated Seventh Fleet with a handy glass table nearby.