Action Girl: Good lord, she beats the stuffing out of a serial killer while the equivalent of nine months pregnant.
Anti-Hero: She is one of the most ruthless protagonists in Trek canon.
"Ass" in "Ambassador":
Kira claims to be always diplomatic. Cut to her handling affairs... ("Visionary")
She appointed as Sisko's liaison officer but is blunt about how she doesn't trust the Federation. Fortunately blunt speaking goes down well with her new commander.
Big Sister Instinct: Serves as a mix of a big sis / substitute mother for Ziyal, threatening to tear Garak some new ones if he goes anywhere near her. Garak's as afraid of her wrath as he is the thought of Ziyal being a mole for her dad and killing him.
Bookends:
Kira's stint as commander of DS9 was short-lived; she grouchily hands the office over to Sisko upon his arrival. At the very end of the series, she's given control of the station again — having grown wiser, less gung-ho, and more even-tempered. This is symbolized by Kira inheriting Sisko's baseball.
At the start of the series, she just finished being an insurgent against the Cardassian Occupation. At the end, she is once again an insurgent helping the Cardassians fight the Dominion on their own soil. The situation is noted several times.
Break the Cutie: That's quite the achievement, but Silarin Prin, from "The Darkness and the Light," managed to do that twice. First, he killed all the friends Kira made during her days at the Shakaar Resistance cell, except Shakaar himself. Second, he cracked her armor by trashing her actions and ideology, backing it with some good points. She managed to defend herself, but considering what she said to the rescue team after their fight, it's obvious Kira thought he was right to some extent, even talking in the same manner he did.
Broken Bird: The horrors she has seen... well, it could break your heart.
The Bus Came Back: She, Quark, and Deep Space 9 finally return in the Star Trek: Lower Decks episode "Hear All, Trust Nothing."
Cheshire Cat Grin: If she smiles while delivering a threat to someone, they should probably run far away.
Child Soldier: She joined the Resistance when she was twelve, and was only fourteen when she fought in the Resistance liberation of the Gallitep labor camp (i.e. Space Auschwitz).
Colonel Badass:
Promoted in the seventh season. (Nana Visitor joked that Kira should open a fried chicken joint on the Promenade.)
Commanding Coolness: Bajoran Colonel or not, since Sisko was a Captain by that time, the highest Starfleet rank he could confer was Commander. This was done to provide Kira with formal Starfleet duds, which arouse slightly less animosity amongst the Cardassian rebels she's supposed to train. Her time as an officer has honed (rather than dampened) her instincts as a terrorist, as well: Kira learns that being subtle—using a scalpel rather than a pipe—is much more effective and disruptive.
Combat Pragmatist: Fair tactics do not keep you alive in the Bajoran Resistance. Kira, therefore, doesn't use them.
Custom Uniform of Sexy: Later traded in her padded-shoulder uniform for a high-heeled number, in the grand Trek tradition. The other members of her militia are stuck wearing the garish red and pink number.
Dark and Troubled Past: Cardassian Occupation. In other words, she is a Holocaust survivor.
Defrosting Ice Queen:
At the start of the series Kira is always all business and is suspicious of Starfleet. She calms down after Sisko saves her life and proves that he's willing to defend the Bajorans.
Largely moves away from this trope altogether as the series progresses. Character Development comes into play as we learn that Kira, while always wearing "armor" to some degree, is more than capable of kindness, and genuine human(oid) emotion.
She mellows out a lot towards Quark after he saves her skin in "Sacrifice of Angels". She goes from casually calling him a goblin and threatening him with physical violence to pulling a lot of strings inside the Federation bureaucracy to get him a high-profile prisoner for a trade. Keep in mind she's a Bajoran citizen and virtually have no power over such matters.
Deuteragonist: Compared with Sisko as the highest ranked Bajoran officer on what still is a Bajoran station, albeit as second in command under him.
Dislikes the Shiny Weapon: Kira has expressed distaste for the shiny high-tech phaser rifles that Starfleet uses. They may be versatile and high-tech, but that only means that there's more to go wrong. On the other hand Bajoran phaser rifles are simple and rugged, you can depend on them.
Doom Magnet: Every person she cares about tends to either die or be forced to leave her.
Enemy Mine: As the station's Number Two, she slowly learned to grin and bear it when negotiating with the likes of Romulans, Cardassians, et al. Her end-series arc saw Kira deployed to Cardassia-Prime to whip them into guerilla fighters like herself.
Establishing Character Moment: Punch that console like you mean it, girl!
The first time we meet her, she's in the middle of a screaming match with the Bajoran provisional government, and when she sees Sisko the first words out of her mouth are a rather tart "I suppose you'll want the office." About the only thing we don't see in those first thirty seconds is her soft side — it takes us half a season to see that.
Practically every one of Kira's scenes in "Emissary" counts. From rummaging through Promenade rubble in a tank top (despite being a senior staffer), telling Bashir to stick his Federation smugness where the sun doesn't shine, her wild instructions to O'Brien to make the station move, to playing the equivalent of Russian Roulette with torpedoes.
Fanservice Pack: After the season 4 opener, Kira received a tighter uniform with no shoulder pads, plus high heels. She is the only Bajoran militiaman (albeit a Major) to be seen wearing it. Part of it may have also been that Terry Farrell is 8 inches taller than Visitor, but one suspects fanservice was involved also — after all, Jonathan Frakes is 9 inches taller than LeVar Burton and Burton never wore heels.
Fantastic Caste System: According to the old Bajoran caste system, she was supposed to be an artist. The castes were abandoned during the occupation, but her parents were still apparently disappointed and embarrassed that she never showed any artistic talent. When she attempts to be artistic during "Accession" when Akorem Laan is temporarily the Emissary, she ends up sculpting one of the worst pieces of pottery that's ever existed; it doesn't look like anything. She ends up giving it to Sisko, drolly noting that it's "a Kira Nerys original."
Fantastic Racism: Against Cardassians, because she was on the other end of it from them during their brutal occupation of her planet. Growing past it is part of her character development, beginning with the episode "Duet" and culminating perhaps in "Ties of Blood and Water"; she never "forgives" the Cardassian people as a whole, but she comes to acknowledge that it would be wrong to kill Cardassians just because they're Cardassian.
Femme Fatale: "Necessary Evil" is Noir to the core. The episode has Constable Odo employing a gumshoe monologue to parody the Captain's Log, and flashbacks to a murder he investigated while working for the Cardassian occupiers. Interestingly enough, Major Kira turns out to be the real murderer.
Fiery Redhead: She makes her temper very clear from the moment she's introduced.
Genocide Survivor: She survived the brutal, genocidal Occupation of Bajor, which the show itself compares to the Holocaust. More specifically, she was raised in the Singha camp, she later joined the Resistance as a child soldier, and she liberated the Gallitep death camp at 14 years old. Since both of her parents are known to be dead, and her siblings are seen in flashbacks but never spoken of in the present day, it's likely she was the Sole Survivor of her family as well.
Girliness Upgrade: In year two, the outfit got tighter and heels came out, eventually leading to the inevitable Star Trek catsuit. According to Visitor, the original outfit made her walk like John Wayne.
Heel Realization: To a point; she never outright apologizes or regrets what she did to the Cardassians during the Resistance, but over the course of the series, she comes to recognize that she can't just treat every Cardassian as equally guilty, such as expressing regret when a Cardassian is killed by another Bajoran when the Cardassian was just a clerk during the Occupation, and becoming genuinely fond of Tora Ziyal even though the girl is the daughter of Gul Dukat.
Honorary Aunt: Takes on this role to the O'Brien family when she had to act as the 'incubator' for their son, with Molly explicitly asking if Nerys was her aunt.
Hot-Blooded: Kira is very passionate about what she believes in, although she is capable of following orders when the chips are down.
There have been several cases where her emotions overrided her logic, like trying to open a room that was exposed to space because her friends were in there despite several security guards trying to stop her.
Hot Skitty-on-Wailord Action: Bajoran/Changeling. Odo's species being shapeshifters, it's implied that he brings certain special skills to the bedroom. He outright transforms into a cloud of sparkling gas at one point to give Kira an idea of what the Great Link is like. It's safe to say this is not the first (or last) time his shapeshifting skills have been used for kinky purposes.
Hugh Mann: Ironically for a guerrilla fighter trained in infiltration and espionage, Kira sticks out like a sore thumb in alien environments. Watching her attempting to blend into The Roaring '20s or the Summer of Love is cringe-worthy.
Kira: (wearing a stupid band-aid over her nose) I...? uh... I broke my nose.
I Did What I Had to Do: As mentioned, she's a former Resistance fighter, and not of the prettier variety either.
Kira: None of you belonged on Bajor. It wasn't your world. For fifty years, you raped our planet! You lived on our land and you took the food out of our mouths, and I don't care whether you held a phaser in your hand or you ironed shirts for a living; you were all guilty and you were all legitimate targets!
- "The Darkness and the Light"
Iron Lady: She scares the piss out of most of the male characters. Yes, Garak too.
Kicked Upstairs: Sisko requested a Bajoran national to accompany him as a token of goodwill. The Bajoran Provisional Government seized the chance to get Kira out of their hair. Of course, it then backfires on them after the Wormhole's discovery. In an instant, DS9 goes from backwater outpost to one of the most important facilities in the entire Alpha Quadrant—making Kira's role as Bajor's liaison one of the most important postings in its Militia (a responsibility and role Kira gradually comes to embrace).
The Lancer: At first.
Last-Name Basis: For the first few seasons, very rarely is she called by her given name, Nerys. Even into the later series, the only people who regularly call her this are Jadzia Dax, her closest friend, Dukat, who is creepily obsessed with her, and Odo, her love interest. And even Odo only switches over once they actually get together.
Love Epiphany: Or as she calls it, a "moment of pure clarity." Good thing she doesn't waste time, because it took her the better part of a decade to figure it out.
Major Injury Underreaction: Kira gets knifed in the back and what does she do? Merely pulls the d'k tahg out of her back and judo chops the Klingon who stabbed her. When Sisko rushes over, she dismisses her injury as Just a Flesh Wound. ("The Way of the Warrior")
Majorly Awesome: For most of the show's run.
The McCoy: A darker version. The brutal Cardassian oppression of her homeworld took away most of her loved ones and forced her to do many unsavory things just to survive, with only her faith to sustain her. She can be reasonable (or at least slowly learns to), but she always places her religious beliefs above logic, and she's never afraid to Pay Evil unto Evil, a la her stint with the Resistance. That said, another part of her Character Development is about her learning to use that same emotional core to empathize with the people who once tortured her, and eventually fight for them.
Meaningful Name:
"Kira" means "strong woman" in Slavonic. In-universe, it's a Meaningful Name in her native Bajoran, too; it serves as a hallmark of the artisan d'jarra.
"Nerys" is a Welsh name derived from nêr ("hero") and nerth ("manliness, courage.")
Moe Couplet: With Odo.
Number Two: Of Deep Space Nine and, initially, the Defiant despite not being a member of Starfleet; essentially shares the role with Worf from season 4 onward. Worf plays the eager pupil to Sisko's salty teacher, while Kira shares a somewhat more fraternal bond with him.
Oblivious to Love: Justified, as Odo admits that he'd been doing his best to conceal his feelings for her.
Odd Friendship: With O'Brien. When she moves in with the O'Briens as the surrogate carrier of their child, the B-plot of an episode is dedicated to them realizing their mutual attraction and coming to terms with it.
Opposites Attract: Kira is an unrepentant hot-tempered former terrorist and mass murderer who gladly tried to cause as much chaos as she could against the Cardassians occupying Bajor. Odo is a unrepentant emotionally subdued borderline fascist who is fixated on order and was once a collaborator to the Cardassians. The two end up falling in love nonetheless.
Parental Substitute:
Kira Nerys' father Taban was shot by the Cardassians, and died alone in the caves. After the events of "Second Skin," Kira gains a surrogate father-figure in the form of a seditious Cardassian, Ghemor, who opposes the policies of his world. Ghemor later comes down with a terminal illness; after learning of something he did during the Occupation, Kira storms off, only to be convinced to return as "he doesn't deserve to die alone." She returns and stays with him until he dies, and then buries him next to her father. The reason he came to Kira as he was dying says a lot about their relationship, and about him. He was following an old Cardasian death tradition: Giving all your hoarded secret knowledge about your enemies to someone you trust to use it in a way that will grant you posthumous revenge. Granted, Ghemor had no heirs, but to pass this knowledge down to a non-Cardassian (let alone a Bajoran) is almost unheard of.
Kira later becomes a semi-maternal, Cool Big Sis kind of mentor to Ziyal, whose Bajoran mother died years ago. Dukat exploits this by attempting to form a family unit with himself and Kira as the "parents" and Ziyal as their shared, metaphorical daughter, hoping that Kira's fondness for Ziyal will eventually translate into romantic affection for him. Dukat being Dukat, this only enrages Kira further.
Patriotic Fervor: Kira's loyalty to Bajor is absolute, even if her dismal feelings toward her own government are on display. When it looked like Kira might be called away due to a regime change, Sisko was struck dumb while Kira had to blink back tears. No matter how much she owed and respected this man, she could not turn away from her duty. ("Accession")
Kira: ahem... If you don't hit it off with Major Jatarn, I can think of a few other people. It shouldn't be that hard to find someone to replace me.
Sisko: I don't doubt I can find someone to fill your post... but replace you?
Pay Evil unto Evil: Less so now that she's gotten tangled up with Starfleet, but this is definitely part of her past. Kira acknowledges that she and the Bajoran Resistance were terrorists, but while she isn't proud of the things she did, neither does she apologize for them.
Power Hair: It varies somewhat. For most of the series she has it cut very short and brushed back, but in the pilot and final season, it's chin-length.
Punny Name: Nerys is a homophone of "nariz," the Spanish word for "nose."
The Quisling: Unwittingly, after Dukat takes the station back, and it takes her a few episodes to realize it. The first part of the revelation came when a Vedek who Kira asked to not protest the Dominion control committed Heroic Suicide by hanging herself in public. The second was the morning after, as Kira works side-by-side with Cardassians and Jem'Hadar, and specifically when a Cardassian soldier brings her a mug of tea. Kira then realized just what she had become.
Rank Up: Originally a Major in Bajoran Militia, she is promoted to Colonel after Sisko takes an extended leave of absence. She is later sent to Cardassia to help Damar organize his rebellion in embryo and teach them the finer art of guerrilla warfare. Sisko grants her the rank of commander (complete with proper Starfleet swag) in order to help her gain the trust of those Cardassians who still harbor mistrust of her old uniform. She becomes the new station commander of DS9 in the finale.
Reassignment Backfire: The Provisional Government appointed her as Sisko's liaison on Deep Space Nine to get rid of her. In the first episode Sisko is revealed as The Emissary and the space station is used to establish Bajor's claim to the wormhole, making her position highly crucial.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: Red (practically scarlet) to Sisko's Blue.
Religious Bruiser: A true believer in the Prophets who toasts each evening with a restful meditation and candlelit prayer. However, it is not all hymns and spreading peace for the Major, who still threatens to snap Quark’s arm at the merest hint of inappropriate advances.
She's devout enough that a Prophet chose her as its physical vessel in "Reckoning." The Pah-Wraiths decided to fight dirty by possessing Jake to fight her.
Doubtless Kira's fierce devotion to Ben Sisko was informed by his status as Emissary, as foretold in Bajoran scripture. If it comes to a coin-flip between Kai Winn and Commander Sisko, Kira will come down on Sisko's side every time.
The Revolution Will Not Be Civilized: Her backstory as a leader of the Bajoran Resistance. (Kira admits that if she had had possession of the Defiant during the Occupation she would have destroyed Terok Nor and hit the Cardassians so hard that they would be begging for peace. ) Adjusting to peacetime is a major component of her arc.
Sci-Fi Bob Haircut: She alternated between Boyish Short Hair and this. Her version was more asymmetrical than Star Trek: The Next Generation's Ensign Ro Laren, the character who was initially meant to be Sisko's Number One.
Shell-Shocked Veteran: The Occupation was not fun for her. Like many Bajorans, she had never tasted peacetime until just recently.
Show Some Leg: She sometimes took on this role during the Occupation: Sneaking into Cardassian settlements and pretending to be a harmless girl or a comfort woman. Even an Occupation-era Odo fell for her act.
Small Name, Big Ego: Kira somewhat... overestimated the threat she posed to the Cardassian security apparatus, as revealed in her dossier. Dax and O'Brien attempt to keep it out of her hands, but no luck. ("Battle Lines")
Kira: "A minor operative whose activities are limited to running errands for the terrorist leaders"?!
Son of a Whore: A trip through the Orb of Time revealed her mother, Kira Meru, was one of Dukat's "comfort women" during the occupation.
Supporting Leader: Leads the ground assault on Cardassia Prime. As irony would have it, her troops are composed of rebelling Cardassians, whom she trains using the same guerrilla tactics that overthrew Bajor's occupation.
Suspiciously Similar Substitute: Her part was originally written to be Star Trek: The Next Generation Recurring Character Ro Laren, but Michelle Forbes didn't want to commit to a TV series. By a couple episodes in, however, Kira had become a character in her own right and developed her own personality and history. Showrunners later remarked that Kira — who was emphatically not a member of Starfleet and didn't trust the Federation one whit — provided much more opportunity for drama and conflict.
Ten Minutes in the Closet: Used to resolve a months-long disagreement between Odo and Kira (specifically, his falling under the influence of the Female Changeling) in "You are Cordially Invited" — so we never actually hear the discussion, we just find out that they've been up all night talking. Incidentally, Visitor and Auberjonois pitched a fit about this being a huge cop-out, and insisted that any other arguments between the two be resolved onscreen.
This argument was depicted in Worlds of Deep Space Nine- Volume Three.
Terrible Artist: She claims to have been the worst finger-painter in preschool. She also epically fails as a sculptor, creating "a flock of flightless birds". This is ironic, as according to her d'jarra, she is supposed to be an artist.
Token Religious Teammate: She's the only member of the senior staff who wholeheartedly believes in the Bajoran faith. Not only is she quite pious, attending the temple regularly, she's also more religiously conservative than Vedek Bariel (the Bajoran equivalent of a cardinal, in the running for the Bajoran equivalent of the papacy).
Trauma Conga Line: Of all the main characters, she's the one who has undergone the most loss and damage (arguably aside from O'Brien).
Tsundere: Normally tsuntsun but liable to go deredere in certain romantic situations, usually around Bariel or Odo.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With O'Brien, during the time when she is the surrogate carrying Miles and Keiko's baby. Both Kira and O'Brien naturally freak out when they realize they're developing romantic feelings for the other, having gotten closer during this time.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: When she persuades Dukat not to kill Ziyal and to instead take her back to Cardassia, she unwittingly sets off a chain of events that starts with Dukat being demoted to a freighter captain, and ultimately results in his negotiating for the Cardassian Union to become part of the Dominon, giving the latter a base of power in the Alpha Quadrant and leading to the eventual Dominion War (and to add insult to injury, Ziyal ends up being killed by Damar just two years after her rescue anyway). Downplayed in that had the Cardassians not joined the Dominon they would likely have been conquered by the Klingons, who would then have gone after the Federation — and regardless of who ended up as the victor in that conflict, they would have been severely weakened and in no shape to fight off the Dominion when they eventually did show up.
Uptight Loves Wild: She's the "wild" one, being considerably more fiery than the much more sedate Odo.
Walking Techbane:
Bones had the transporter phobia, Pulaski the mistrust of androids. Kira's nemesis? Holodecks. Not only does she consider it a frivolous waste of time, Kira seems to have difficulty distinguishing fantasy from reality; when Dax dragged her into a Camelot scenario, Kira ended up slugging Lancelot before he could kiss her. Justified when Quark attempts to trick her into a holosuite so he can scan her to make a holographic copy for a customer. She finally gets over it towards the end; when Vic Fontaine's 1960s-era Las Vegas holoprogram is overrun by The Mafia, she wholeheartedly volunteers to be one of the most pivotal members of the heist group, seducing a holographic Mafioso named Frankie Eyes to keep him distracted from the rest of the group operating inside the casino.
In "Civil Defense," Kira's unorthodox way of jimmying open the doors in Ops is to draw her gun and shoot the door. When it comes disabling the life support system, reliable Kira once again pulls out her gun and fires happily at the console.
What Measure Is a Humanoid?: Kira's not human, but close enough.
What the Hell, Hero?:
More than a few people are uncomfortable about her terrorist past. She is unrepentant due to the I Did What I Had to Do nature of fighting the Cardassian Occupation. Nevertheless, it does cause her a not-insignificant amount of angst.
She issues an aghast one to Odo in "Children of Time" when she finds out his other counterpart sacrificed the existence of 8,000 people to save her.
When She Smiles: How Odo feels about her.
Would Hurt a Child: In "The Darkness And The Light", she's utterly nonchalant when reminded that she killed a Gul's entire family (which would include his children), saying they deserved it because they "didn't belong on Bajor."
Your Terrorists Are Our Freedom Fighters: In "The Darkness And The Light", Kira outright screams her defense of terrorism (at least when it comes to Occupiers Out of Our Country) to a Cardassian who's taking revenge on members of her former resistance/terrorist cell, who maimed him in a bombing.
Zip Me Up: Odo. Interestingly, this is after they've gotten together — so he kisses her shoulder along the way.