Abhorrent Admirer:
To Kira; Quark simply cannot take a hint. When caught with their hand in a till, a good Ferengi will shout, 'Thief! Thief!' Likewise, whenever Quark makes a pass and gets shot down, he says to everyone within earshot, 'The woman simply can not get over her latent attraction to me!'
In "Fascination", when he falls under the influence of Lwaxana Troi's Xanthi fever, he briefly starts making the moves on Keiko O'Brien. Needless to say she is not remotely interested, and Miles drags him away by his ears.
Abstract Apotheosis : Word of God and Dante says that he is the station. As Shimerman puts it, "He is as much a part of the station as the carpets, the pylons, and the transporters." In the series finale, he symbolizes the continuity of DS9 and pretty much speaks for it when he says (in the final line of the show):
"The more things change, the more they stay the same..."
Accidental Proposal: Quark always wished for a statuesque alien babe of his own, but he probably didn’t count on getting married at knife-point to a Klingon woman whose husband he accidentally killed! Oddly enough, it works out pretty well.
Anti-Hero: A Pragmatic Hero who's pretty much in for himself and his family, but there's no cruelty in his heart and he'll reluctantly help when things get too hot.
Art Evolution: Early in the series the area around Quark's eyes darken to a violet/purple hue.
Bartender Confidant: He's more self-serving than the average example, but genuinely enjoys talking to his customers and getting to know them. It's why he chose running a bar over something more impersonal (like arms dealing).
Because I'm Good At It: The sad truth of the matter is he is really good at selling weapons, with his holosuite arrangements (useful for product demonstrations) and his way with people. It's precisely the sort of career he might have pursued if he'd remained in the Ferengi Alliance.
Benevolent Boss: Both this and Mean Boss, thanks to the Rules of Acquisition. He considers himself benevolent because only he is allowed to sexually harass the dabo girls! To his credit, he did leap into the path of a knife to protect them in "In the Pale Moonlight."
And in "Bar Association", he refuses to let Rom take time off to treat a life-threatening ear infection, but it's later revealed that he cut everyone's salary so he wouldn't have to fire anyone.
Quark's status as either is largely dependent on viewpoints. By hew-mon standards, he's an appalling boss. By Ferengi standards, however, he's astoundingly benevolent (to the point where Brunt outright accuses him of being a Philanthropist which judging by Quark's reaction is possibly the worst insult one Ferengi can level at another). He only takes 30% of their tips, and even gives them vacations.
Beware the Silly Ones: A mostly non-violent example. He does occasionally kill Jem'Hadar, but he mostly shows this with wit and ingenuity. The best example is in "The Magnificent Ferengi" where he and his Ferengi recruits lure a Vorta to Empok Nor, trick him into sending most of his backup several light years away, kill his two remaining guards, then take him prisoner and hand him to the Federation. All of which was improvised when the original good-faith trade plan fell through.
Also, remember: he can and has crushed gold bars into pieces.
Big Brother Instinct: Definitely doesn't come through most of the time, but Quark was willing to risk his life when Rom was going to be executed by the Dominion.
Blue-and-Orange Morality: Part of the reason that Quark comes across as a Small Name, Big Ego is that much of what non-Ferengi see as his flaws, he considers his best qualities.
Boldly Coming: Bajorans, Vulcans, Humans, Klingons, Cardassians, Trill.. you know, it might be easier to list the species Quark hasn't hit on.
Bookends: Being threatened with physical violence by Kira. It happens at the end of the pilot and series finale. Quark practically winks at the camera.
Can't Get in Trouble for Nuthin': ...On the other hand, Quark seemed to enjoy complete immunity to arrest or prosecution, as Constable Odo continually failed to (or deliberately chose not to) nail him over the course of seven years. In the one instance where Odo finally slapped cuffs on him ("The Ascent"), the Orion crime syndicate bombed their runabout to prevent Quark from testifying against them, foiling his transportation to a Federation court. After they're stranded on an inhospitable mountain, Odo takes great amusement in knowing that Quark is still a little fish despite years of wheeling and dealing; however, Quark points out that this means Odo has spent a solid decade trying to catch a nobody — and failing. If I'm a failure, then what are you?
Sisko is insistent he be kept around and active for his role as community leader; Quark had to be blackmailed into not leaving the station on his own in the pilot. Most of his revealed schemes are actually fairly petty, like low-level smuggling and trying to start a rat-fighting ring. He's also been shown acting as an informant for Odo when Worf accidentally broke up a sting operation they were pulling.
Casual Kink: Despite ostensibly believing in traditional Ferengi values, it's hinted that Quark does get off on aggressive alien females. He appears to have enjoyed his Destructo-Nookie with Grilka, and when a leather-clad Ezri Tigan from the Mirror Universe walks into his quarters and puts a knife to his throat, Quark thinks it's kinky roleplay and is quite eager to play along.
"Spare me from beings who think pain is pleasure. [beat] In small doses, perhaps..."
Chivalrous Pervert: He has his moments, such as the time he protected one of his Dabo girls from being assaulted by a drunken customer.
The Cobbler's Children Have No Shoes: He's burned through quite a few girlfriends because they mattered less to him than furthering his businesses. And yet he hectors Odo over lacking a heart and nonexistent personal life.
Cool and Unusual Punishment: Quark shows a surprising sense of willpower by dragging Odo up an icy mountain and refusing to give up — he refuses to let his brother get the bar, his nephew be completely corrupted by Federation values and to die with his body unsold! ("The Ascent")
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Quark's usually portrayed as a coward, but just count the number of times he kills veteran Jem'Hadar soldiers over the course of the series.
A Day in the Limelight: He's pretty much the star of the show for all the Ferengi-centric episodes. Particularly the ones that take place almost entirely on Ferenginar.
Determinator: Not often, but as shown in "The Ascent", Quark, crashed on a uninhabited planet, refuses to die and attempts to signal for help simply to spite Odo. In one episode, he even survives a hit from a phaser that was shown killing someone just a few minutes earlier (showing it wasn't set to stun). The only reason they can think of for why Quark doesn't die from it is that he absolutely does not want Rom getting the bar. His tenacity is so strong that Nog references it as being something he's inherited as one of his own good qualities ("...but I have my father's hands, and my uncle's tenacity!") when making his case to Sisko about joining Starfleet.
Easily Forgiven: Quark is caught breaking the law on numerous occasions, including illegal smuggling, arranging weapon sales for a terrorist group (the Maquis) and disabling the station's early warning system for an invading armed force, yet never seems to suffer any major repercussions for doing so. The Prime Directive explains several of these. Also, when Quark realized he'd crossed a line, he found a way to atone for his actions. For instance, when Jadzia was put in mortal danger by one of his schemes, he put his own life at risk to help her.
Subverted by Major Kira, who was extremely upset about him putting Jadzia's life at risk, even though he ultimately helped her. (Quark making a sexual hologram of her without her permission can't have helped either.) It was only after he risked his life to help out the Deep Space 9 resistance cell at the beginning of season 6 that she decided to forgive him.
Everyone Has Standards:
He goes into business with his cousin Gaila, an arms merchant, but changes his mind and ultimately wrecks Gaila's business because he can't stand to sell the death of millions.
When the Dominion takes over the station, Quark is initially okay with it. Sure, he misses the Federation, but business is good and (as he says) the current occupation is nowhere near as bad as the Cardassian one. However, his viewpoint changes over the course of the arc. Towards the end, he bemoans the current situation, saying he doesn't like the Cardassians and finds the Jem'Hadar creepy (not to mention they don't ever buy anything so all they do is take up space and scare away business). He culminates by saying, "I wanna sell root beer again!"
Brunt's scheme to crash the Ferengi stock market to become the Grand Nagus is too power hungry even for him.
Quark: (The Grand Nagus) has to reflect the public's greed!
Despite his frequent antagonism of Odo, he's one of the first to stand up for Odo when he's framed for murder.
It's also an interesting case where it could be argued that the reason Quark is considered such an anomaly by his fellow Ferengi is that he has too many standards by comparison. He's abnormally benevolent, being willing to give vacations and make extremely pragmatic and outright sensible decisions to keep his staff and customers relatively happy even if he's basically a pretty cruel businessman by the standards of the Federation.
The Family for the Whole Family: For all his scheming, he's not one to let innocent people get murdered to satiate his own greed. During the occupation, Quark sold food to Bajoran refugees cheaply and would even furnish them alibis if the price was right.
Lampooned when Quark got temporarily promoted to Nagus. His office suite, pet-stroking, and dialogue ("and yet now you call me Nagus...") evokes Vito Corleone. ("The Nagus")
Fang Thpeak: Especially in early episodes, as with many Ferengi and Klingons, thanks to the prosthetic fangs.
Faster Than They Look: Quark despite his short stature is an amazing sprinter as shown in "The Magnificent Ferengi" where it took other Ferengi including the Starfleet-trained young Nog minutes to catch up with him. He's also a good quickdraw with a disruptor.
The Fettered: Ironically, Quark is insanely principled and does his best to always adhere to his ideals. It's just that he follows the Ferengi's greed-based Blue-and-Orange Morality, meaning he comes off as totally amoral to everyone else.
Foil: Quark, like all Ferengi, is anti-Trek personified. Anything the Federation is for, Quark is against — and he even offers up some counter-arguments.
Friendly Enemy: He and Odo eventually arrive at this. Just a stone's throw away from the series finale ("The Sound of Her Voice"), Odo pretends to not notice Quark smuggling gemstones through the station, netting the Ferengi some much-needed money. Lucky for the oblivious Quark ("I beat him! I beat Odo!"), the Constable owed him one.
Meanwhile, in the first season episode "A Man Alone", he remarks that, as his oldest adversary, he's the closest thing Odo has to a friend.
In "Fascination," Odo makes an offhanded remark basically admitting to stalking Quark.
"I usually make it a point to drop by Quark's three or four times a day at random intervals, just to let him know that I'm thinking about him."
In the finale, Odo pointedly defies this trope, though Quark takes it completely in stride. Quark is ultimately proven right, thus playing the trope straight, Odo simply wouldn't admit it to Quark's face.
Quark: "Can't you see it? The man loves me. It's written all over his back."
The Gambler: Self-proclaimed in "Starship Down," and the reason why Quark prefers a risky investment to a safe one.
Good-Guy Bar: Quark's bar is the biggest attraction on the Promenade, but it's all dependent on traffic coming through the wormhole. If the station is at peace, the bar's in good shape. If there's a war on, it becomes a Bad Guy Bar — which is particularly bad in the Dominion's case.
Quark: The Jem'Hadar don't eat, don't drink, and they don't have sex. And if that wasn't bad enough, the Founders don't eat, don't drink, and they don't have sex either. Which, between you and me, makes my financial future less than promising.
Ziyal: It might not be so bad. For all we know, the Vorta could be gluttonous, alcoholic sex-maniacs.
Vic's nightclub is a nested example of a bar-within-a-bar. His program was originally intended to run for only an hour or two, since the holosuite is a rental. However, Nog later arranged it for it to run continuously.
Good Old Ways: Why he doesn't get on with his 'ahead of the times' mother and why he's skeptical of Rom's new Ferenginar. Over the course of the show, he went from being an unusually progressive boss to behind the times just by standing still.
Hidden Depths: It's usually a B-Plot or sprinkled into background material, but Quark is not the typical Ferengi (there were lots of Big Ego, Hidden Depths moments featuring Quark).
His comment in "Bar Association" is telling; he can either cut everyone's hours (and salaries) by a third to keep the bar running, or fire half his staff. He chooses to keep everyone's job. He almost never resorts to violence to get anything done (other Ferengi have no such compunctions), and the reason why he gets so many Strawman / Jerkass Has a Point moments is that he is entirely too human and can relate (his "Root Beer" speech is classic Quark). He gets into constant trouble with the Ferengi Commerce Authority because of his strangely compassionate side. Comes to a head in "Body Parts," where Brunt explains that his hatred of Quark is not due to any particular misdeed, but rather that he is a philanthropist by Ferengi standardsnote .
On the other hand, this also explains why he's such a traditionalist. While other Ferengi are often shallow and greedy enough to do just about anything for profit, he considers the public welfare just as important.
He's also deeply religious, almost as spiritual as Kira in his own way. He's been seen praying and in one episode even had a dream about visiting the Ferengi equivalent of Heaven.
He's often capable of providing good advice, even if it's to people he (cordially) can't stand. One time he out-logic'd a Vulcan.
For all his Ferengi sexism and lechery, Quark feels attraction toward strong, independent women such as Grilka and Pel. Over the series, Quark also respectfully assists Kira, Jadzia Dax, and other strong women.
He defies the Dominion and joins Ziyal in freeing Kira and Rom from certain death by holding Jem'Hadar at gunpoint. Even Quark seems surprised by his actions.
Among a people who traditionally regard self-preservation as a higher virtue than courageous sacrifice, Quark has often risked his own life and limb even when strategic withdrawal and writing off the losses would be more immediately profitable, and often seems to resent his people's reputation for cowardice.
Honest John's Dealership: The Ferengi's Hat. Lampshaded in "Little Green Men", when one of the 20th Century humans mentions that Quark reminds him of his brother-in-law, who is a used car salesman.
Honor Before Reason: In a Ferengi way. He was once willing to die (or have Garak kill him) rather than break a Rule of Acquisition. And he once impressed a room full of the most powerful people in the Klingon Empire with his raw courage when putting his life on the line in a duel everyone knew would be a glorified execution, even though he could've run away to save his own skin.
Hypocrite: Disgusted by the decline in traditional Ferengi values (unrelenting greed), he decides he's going to turn down the job of Grand Negus unless Zek rolls back his reforms. It doesn't seem to occur to him that by turning down a job that would make him obscenely wealthy on principle, he was himself rejecting those very same traditional Ferengi values.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: One tryst in particular got him canned from a lucrative job. He forgot the 112th Rule - never sleep with the boss's sister.
He's still fuming over turning down his cousin's offer to go into business with him. Oh, you remember Cousin Gaila; the guy with his own moon? Unsurprisingly, Garak — who knows 80 ways to kill someone and now ekes out a living mending pants — is a little less than sympathetic. (Quark may not be filthy rich but he is pretty well off.)
Garak: How thoughtless of me not to consider the effect the destruction of my homeworld would have (gestures around) ...on your business. These must be trying times for you. Be brave.
That said, background imagery and throwaway lines in both Picard and Lower Decks, if taken at face value, show that years after the events of the series, Quark did well enough for himself that his bar is now a Quadrant spanning franchise!
Mariner: (regarding a storefront on Starbase 25) Oh, they have a Quark's here now! That used to just be an abandoned lot where teens made mistakes!
That being said, a season 3 episode of Lower Decks does show that Quark's copying Karemma technology and nearly causing Tendi and Rutherford to get taken to the Gamma Quadrant resulted in a deal where the Karemma dropped the charges against Quark in exchange for a hefty chunk of his profits, so he's definitely not as successful thanks to that screwup.
Intel-Gathering Bartender: Quark owns a bar on a Space Station at the mouth of a wormhole that connects two quadrants of the galaxy and serves as the Local Hangout for the cast. A lot of ships that traverse the wormhole stop at the station, and their crews will often visit the bar, where Quark learns everything he can about new business opportunities. On some occasions, Quark's ear for profitable information gets put to other uses, like spying for La Résistance during the six-month-long Dominion occupation. He also smuggled supplies to the Bajorans during the Occupation, at "just above cost".
Interspecies Romance: With Grilka, a female Klingon; over the course of two episodes she kidnaps and marries him to save her House from being taken by an enemy, he saves her House, they divorce, and then they start falling in love. She only appears in two episodes without further mention, so it's unknown where things went after the first time they had sex. In the continuity of Star Trek Online, it's mentioned she ended up marrying Worf in 2386 and they have a son together. Also with Natima Lang, a Cardassian woman who Quark was genuinely deeply in love with.
Iron Butt-Monkey: Quark takes an amazing amount of pounding on occasions, include one severe Naussican-inflicted breakdown that among other things shattered one of his eye sockets. But he always bounces back (though it probably helps that there's a doctor right across the Promenade from his bar).
Jerk with a Heart of Gold:
He doesn't get along with either his mother or his brother, and rarely interacts with his nephew at all, but it's made clear in several scenes with Rom; as much as Quark may belittle or argue with them, he clearly loves them. When the station came under attack and he thought Rom might have been killed, he abandoned the bar and went to help search the wreckage, sounding incredibly worried as he asked Kira if she had seen his brother.
While everybody else, especially Worf, wasn't sure how to react to Ezri Dax's arrival at Deep Space Nine, Quark was the first person outside the Siskos to welcome her.
He allegedly sold supplies to the Bajorans at cost during the occupation. He denied the allegation, claiming it was just above cost (which still counts, as he surely could've gouged them if he really wanted to). He makes comments throughout the series about how awful the Cardassian Occupation was, and it's implied he's owed a lot of favors on Bajor because of all the times he provided subtle assistance to Bajoran laborers... and to the resistance.
Though it was in an Alternate Timeline, when Sisko had apparently died and a depressed Jake wanted to spend time with Nog, Quark gave his nephew the day off with zero hesitation despite the bar being very busy.
Kavorka Man: Quark beds an absurd number of women throughout his career despite being a short gonk with a mostly obnoxious personality. He was well on his way to "melting a Vulcan heart" before she got jammed up for her Maquis activities.
Knowledge Broker: Sisko considers Quark an anchor to the merchant community and social potpourri of the station, and repeatedly takes steps to keep him in operation. Grand Nagus Zek posits that this role gives Quark the potential to be one of the most powerful people in the Alpha Quadrant: while the bar is a seemingly small-time business, being on the edge of the wormhole and having first access to all the information going to and from the Gamma Quadrant means that whoever owns the bar could have a hand in all the business going through without lifting a finger.
By the end of the series, Quark is on a first-name basis with the Federation Ambassador to Qo'nos, has a more than passing acquaintance with the most powerful Klingon Chancellor in generations, is the on-again off-again of the leader of a Klingon Great House who he helped install (remember, Klingon Great Houses field fleets), is well-acquainted with one of the most powerful members of the Bajoran military, his nephew is destined to become one of the Federation's greatest captains, he's the beloved bartender of one of the Federation's most brilliant physicians and one of its most highly-regarded engineers, he's Enemy Mine with the de facto contact point between the Dominion and the Alpha Quadrant, and his brother is the Grand Nagus. You can find richer Ferengi, but you'll never find one with better connections, or one who's better-liked by more powerful people outside of his own species. His influence continues after the series, too. In Picard season one, an important piece of plot-driving information passes to Jean-Luc Picard through the hands of none other than Mister Quark of Ferenginar.
Lethal Chef: Quark was apparently this during his time as cook aboard a Ferengi freighter, which is why he still has (or had) a disrupter pistol.
Quark: ...Every member of that crew thought they were a food critic.
Let No Crisis Go to Waste: Trust Quark to try and make a profit out of the accidental death of a Klingon customer.
Like an Old Married Couple: Rom's first marriage failed when he left to work on DS9. Quark's a confirmed bachelornote , and was the only character to not earn a Last-Minute Hookup in the final season. They're basically a couple, like it or not. Armin Shimerman confirmed that his arc in Season 7 was mending fences with his family, particularly Rom.
Like Parent, Like Spouse: For all Quark's protestations about how Ferengi women should be - docile, submissive, naked - he's not attracted to women like that, except maybe the naked part. He's attracted to aggressive, strong-willed, highly intelligent women. And then you meet his Moogie...
Loser Son of Loser Dad: According to Ishka, her husband wasn't a very successful businessman. Rom seems to have inherited his lack of financial acumen, and Quark's luck isn't so hot either, though he's certainly more savvy than his brother.
Loveable Rogue: Quark may be a money-grubbing, penny-pinching, manipulative little swindler who lies and cheats as easily as sucking air, but he ultimately means no harm, and when push comes to shove, he will do the right thing to help his friends, his family, and his home. Besides, compared to the numerous real villains in the series, he's practically a saint.
Loveable Sex Maniac: Tries to sleep with the Dabo girls he hires, although this gets toned down later. They wound up unionizing to improve the bar's working conditions, but that doesn't entirely stop his wandering hands.
Mayor of a Ghost Town: Began the series as this. Cunningly, Sisko snatches Quark before he can leave the station and appoints him "community leader"; a nice way of saying that if Quark doesn't stay, his nephew goes to jail.
The Millstone: Particularly in the show's early years. Quark often endangers the entire station in pursuit of an illegal transaction. One such incident (smuggling Verad onboard) almost got Jadzia killed — this caused him to tone it down a little.
Necessarily Evil: Odo regularly allows Quark to break the law, while using him to get a bead on the more significant criminals Quark interacts with.
Never My Fault: When he's caught out, you can always count on Quark to throw Rom under the bus. (In fact, there's a provision in the employee contracts that anything that goes wrong in the bar is automatically Rom's fault.) He did it in the pilot episode, he does it every other week, and it's a wonder Rom hasn't buried a spanner in his head by now. It's no surprise that Rom eventually left the bar to pursue his true talent — engineering.
No True Scotsman: Quark catches heat from the Ferengi Commerce Authority for failing to adhere to proper business practices. For a time, the bar is liquidated by the FCA, and Quark himself barred from doing business anywhere within the Ferengi Alliance.
Quark: I can reform! I'll start gouging the customers again! I'll revoke all my employees' vacation time!
Brunt: ...You gave them vacations?
Papa Wolf: Contrary to appearances, he's fiercely protective of his nephew Nog. Although sometimes what he does to "help" is wrong (like sabotaging his entry exam to Starfleet Academy), sometimes it isn't (like gunning down Jem'Hadar soldiers to protect a comatose Nog during the Siege of AR-558). The whole reason he ended up staying on Deep Space Nine to begin with is because if he'd refused, Nog would have been stuck in jail for years.
Persona Non Grata: In "Body Parts", he breaks a contract with his nemesis Brunt. For being in violation of the 17th Rule of Acquisitionnote , his business license was revoked, he was legally barred from doing business with other Ferengi, and he was banished from the Ferengi homeworld. He would regain his license and good standing in Season 6.
Pet the Dog:
He's not afraid to pour some drinks on the house when O'Brien and Bashir are believed to have been killed, or to offer Odo romantic evidence.
He's genuinely happy to hear that Keiko is pregnant and then proceeds to wax nostalgic about Nog being a cute baby; Quark even read what's implied to be the Ferengi equivalent of the Dick and Jane books to the infant Nog ("Acquire, Brok, acquire!").
While he often exploits his bar staff and especially the Dabo girls, he will sometimes come to their defence when patrons get a bit too familiar; at one point during "In The Pale Moonlight" one of the girls is being harassed by a drunken customer, so Quark intervenes (and gets stabbed for his trouble).
Pragmatic Villainy: Quark is an incorrigible smuggler and black marketeer. However, "Things Past" revealed that he refuses to sell maraji crystals (an illegal drug) because the Cardassians don't like them and the Bajorans can't afford them.
Professional Butt-Kisser: To Zek, the Grand Nagus. Zek treats him like pocket lint, but Quark still holds out hope for a reward one day. He never gets it. In fact, being a Professional Butt-Kisser is one of the Rules of Acquisition: "It never hurts to suck up to the boss."
Read the Fine Print: Feeling up the Dabo girls is "part of the job." ...Literally, look at the employee contract. It's in there, buried in a sub-section written in Ferengi-only script.
There's also a provision that anything that goes wrong in the bar is automatically Rom's fault.
Company policy dictates that the staff is not responsible for lost (read: stolen) property. Said policy is spelled out on a small sign hanging over the exit that is easily missable. Ambassador Troi was not pleased.
Real Men Hate Affection: Rom and Quark can never quite be nice to each other and have to express their affection through trading insults. It gets especially tangled during wartime, as Quark becomes the stand-in for every family who waits to hear news from the front. Even he can't keep up pretenses forever.
Rom: You're my brother. Whatever happens, we belong together.
Quark: Well, like I said, you're an idiot. (goes to leave, then kisses Rom on the head)
Rule-Abiding Rebel: By Ferengi standards, Quark is a radical due to such controversial opinions as "women should be allowed to spend and make money", "employees should have bonuses and vacation time", and "deals should be made in good faith." From a modern capitalist point of view - and as he points out himself several times - he's simply making pragmatic economic decisions to maximize his profits, and thus more closely keeping to (stated) Ferengi cultural norms than anyone else.
Shipper on Deck: As the station's eyes and ears (Ha!), Quark comments on the pairings occurring all around him. Even some that never actually took off, such as Sisko/Jadzia.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: To Odo. The Constable has a perpetual suspicious eye on Quark, and Quark's given him ample reason for it.
Subverted with Liquidator Brunt, who would be happy to see Quark dead, or, short of that, shunned by Ferengi society, for watering down traditional Ferengi values.
Small Name, Big Ego: He's not as high up in the views of other Ferengi as he'd like to be.
It's also thrown in his face during "The Ascent". Part of the reason Odo pursued him all those years was because he thought Quark was (or had connections with) part of the Orion Syndicate, and he couldn't even afford the entrance fee. Quark shoots back that this means Odo wasted years hounding him for bearing a failure.
The So-Called Coward: Avidly preaches that he is not a fighter and proclaims himself to be a coward without shame. As seen by these other tropes, Quark's a lot braver than he gives himself credit for.
"I am Quark, slayer of Klingons."
Also this parting shot from "Body Parts":
Quark: Look, I've broken the contract, so do your job. Take my assets, revoke my Ferengi business licence. Do whatever you have to do, then get out. And if I ever see you walk into my bar again...
Brunt: Yes?
Quark: You won't walk out.
Kills at least half a dozen Jem'Hadar Super Soldiers in shootouts over the course of the series, despite how often he insists fighting is no way for a Ferengi to behave. He's a blindingly fast draw with a disruptor pistol and a very good shot.
When circumstances forced him into a duel with a Klingon, he escaped with his life by showing up anyway, throwing the fight and saying how it's effectively an execution ("Killing an unarmed Ferengi... half his size"), calling out the Klingon High Council for letting the farce of an inheritance dispuse continue, goading his opponent into fighting anyway and causing Chancellor Gowron to intervene and admonish his opponent for such a dishonor. Quite a little Batman Gambit on his part.
Was fully intent on defending his bar during the Klingon attack on his own, if not for Rom without his knowledge taking parts of his old service disruptor to fix the replicators.
In "Business As Usual" he was willing to give up his life to sabotage a weapons deal that would have led to the deaths of twenty-two million innocent civilians.
"One life for twenty-two million. Best deal I ever made."
Status Quo Is God: Many things change throughout Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, but one thing never does: Quark will always, ALWAYS end up back tending his bar by the end of any given storyline. Quark's business opportunities never go anywhere significant or backfire and whenever he's handed the opportunity to be rich it's either taken away from him or he's forced to give it up. Conversely, Quark is constantly getting away with things that should have gotten him arrested by Odo likely before the series even started and if his bar is taken away from him he always gets it back.
Super-Senses: Like all Ferengi, Quark's got good ears. Odo uses it to torment him by pacing out his room when Quark's trying to sleep. Even when he's something like a mouse, Quark can still hear him, and it bugs the hell out of him.
Throw the Dog a Bone:
After a whole series-worth of failing to ever get ahead, it's shown by the time of Star Trek: Lower Decks that Quark has become a successful brand unto himself, with a line of (if Mariner's reaction is any indication) a fairly decent line of chain restaurants (themed after himself) and even toys based off the station. Apparently other Ferengi underestimated how much latinum there is in branding.
That said, by the end of his The Bus Came Back trip in "Hear All, Trust Nothing" of Lower Decks, he's immediately back to being on the off-foot again after being caught for being successful for too long off of stolen Karemma technology, with Quark being forced to give up 76% of all of his franchises profits to them as to help facilitate trade relations with the Federation as compensation for his crimes against the Karemma. Something he takes rather poorly when Freeman asks if he's happier being poor than in jail. The ending of that same episode implies Quark will eventually find a way to recoup his losses though, with him acquiring a latinum tooth from Tendi while citing the 9th Rule of Acquisition: "Opportunity plus instinct equals profit".
Token Heroic Orc: Like any good Ferengi, Quark has a keen eye for profit and a self-serving nature. When push comes to shove, however, he will set aside profit to help Sisko and the crew of DS9.
The Un-Favorite: His mother always preferred Rom, partly because Rom takes a lot after his late father. Quark and his mother have a lot in common, but are on opposite ends opinion-wise. As she herself puts it, Rom is always her little boy but Quark grew up young and is more of an equal.
Unrequited Love: Implied to be the case with Jadzia Dax, especially by the time she is married to Worf. After she is killed, his feelings are still there for her successor Ezri.
Unusual Ears: Like all Ferengi.
Vitriolic Best Buds: He and Odo snark and bicker at each other all the time, but Quark will defend Odo if others are against him.
Worthy Opponent: Feels this way about Odo. Even in the second episode, he defends Odo against accusations of murder.
Your Approval Fills Me with Shame: Quark absolutely hates the fact that his most successful business venture — the bar and casino — is a legitimate one. According to him, Quark is mockingly known as "the Synthehol King" back on Ferenginar, a reference to his squeaky-clean reputation amongst the Federation citizens whom he ought to be fleecing left and right. (Synthehol, as the name implies, is a beverage which mimics the taste of alcohol without any of the deleterious effects. It's an absolute joke compared to Ferengi alcohol, which perfectly sums up his homeworld's opinion of him as toothless and non-threatening.)