All of the Other Reindeer: Rom's poor business sense and aptitude for engineering make him an outcast in Ferengi society. Lampshaded by Nog, who is bitterly aware that his father could've been Chief Engineer on a starship if he'd had the opportunity. Instead, he tried to fit the "good Ferengi" mold and go into sales — for which he has absolutely no talent. Nog's disappointment in him (and subsequent successes in Starfleet) is what motivates Rom to quit working for his brother.
Almighty Janitor: Ostensibly a pit boss, Rom is basically forced to perform all of the dirty work Quark shovels on him: Repairs, waiting tables, and cleaning, too. His talents were eventually recognized by Starfleet, averting this trope and leading to a few promotions. Though he did come up with the self-replicating minefield trick, which suggests he's still underemployed. (He eventually became Grand Nagus.)
Annoying Younger Sibling: But pretty much only as far as Quark is concerned.
Beware the Silly Ones: Yeah, he may be a goofball and joke even among the Ferengi, but by the end of Season 5 he is the main reason why the Dominion fleet is unable to cross the wormhole and steamroll the Alpha Quadrant. He also proves to be a pretty brave (if mostly ineffectual) spy and fighter.
As shown under Papa Wolf, and Quark learned the hard way, you do not interfere with his son Nog.
Cain and Abel: Once he realizes he could inherit the bar, he tries to convince Odo that Quark wouldn’t want to be kept alive by artificial means... Then there's the time he cooperated in Quark's (failed, repeatedly) assassination.
Characterization Marches On: Rom was not only unnamed in his first appearance, he also was depicted with a vastly different characterization and even voice by Grodénchik. Later, he was thought of as being an idiot (Odo even said that he couldn't have fixed Quark's replicator, because he couldn't fix a straw if it was bent), but as it turns out, he's a highly competent engineer.
Rom: I've always been smart, brother. I've just lacked self-confidence.
His early appearances as depicted as a cold blooded opportunist who would gladly kill his own brother. Later episodes characterized him as a Kindhearted Simpleton.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: Before he was characterized, he had this towards Quark.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Even in earlier characterizations where Rom isn't the hypercompetent mechanic he is later, he still manages this. Even Odo recognized him as being more devious than Quark, naming Rom along with Gaila (who owns his own moon) and the Grand Nagus.
Ear Ache: At one point, he gets a nasty ear infection, on account of getting too much oomox... self-administered oomox.
Early-Installment Weirdness: In the first season Rom is more ruthless (even trying to kill Quark in "The Nagus") and meaner to Nog. Later seasons depict him as a lovable idiot who wouldn't hurt a fly.
Easily Forgiven: In "The Nagus," Rom actively takes part in a plot to murder Quark, yet Quark seems to hold no grudge and lets him keep working at the bar without ever mentioning this incident again. The rest of the officers and crew on Deep Space Nine don't seem to take issue with this either. Seems to be a case of Status Quo Is God. (Then again, Ferengi culture is only slightly less built on backstabbing duplicity than the Romulans or the Cardassians, so maybe Quark took this as a sign of positive growth on his brother's behalf and possibly even pride.)
"Eureka!" Moment: His epiphany regarding the minefield came on the eve of his wedding, when Rom was freaking out over trivial matters like closet space.
Felon's Failson: In contrast to his cunning brother, Rom apparently takes after their father and has no "lobes" for business, incompetently bumbling any job Quark gives him. He eventually gets a job as a station maintenance worker, which he's much better and happier at.
Gadgeteer Genius:
He off-handedly comes up with the idea of self-replicating anti-starship mines to blockade the Bajoran Wormhole against Dominion reinforcements while barely paying attention. While O'Brien is generally the only man keeping DS9 in general in a modicum of working order, Rom is responsible for all the high technology in Quark's Bar working at all (usually through MacGyvering stuff).
Rom's skill with devices is shown at one point while he and Quark are away and the bar is locked. O'Brien, one of those famed Starfleet engineers who can turn rocks into replicators, is having trouble getting through the lock. Odo passes by and comments that he's never seen a more "convoluted" design.
Nog states that his father is an engineering genius and could easily be the chief engineer of a starship, but is stuck being a waiter in Quark's bar.
Genius Ditz: A damn fine engineer, completely lacking in common sense and, worse for a Ferengi, business sense, until near the end of the show.
Quark: Looks like your stupidity has saved you again.
Rom: It comes in handy sometimes.
Grew a Spine: Over time, he gains more self-confidence (in part thanks to Nog), eventually becoming an engineer for the station rather than the minor partner (and Mr. Fixit) at Quark's Bar.
Happily Married: Him and Leeta.
Hero-Worshipper: Although O'Brien is not an officer, we start to see how respected he is among the rank and file aboard DS9. Nog follows the Chief around like a puppy, and Rom insists on copying his breakfast orders down to the letter. The mere mention of orange juice and bacon makes Quark look like he's about to hurl, suggesting it's far from the usual Ferengi diet.
Hidden Depths: Very well-hidden- even Odo initially thought he was just an idiot who "couldn't fix a straw if it was bent" before reconsidering and realizing he was smarter than he looked. He turned out to be an engineering genius.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: Nog is of the belief that Rom wasted his life as a second rate business man instead of becoming an engineer, which motivates Nog's decision to join Starfleet.
Ignored Expert: He did tell Quark that the holosuites need downtime once a week for essential maintenance. Quark refuses to listen, then blames Rom when, surprise surprise, the holosuites go bust.
Interspecies Romance: He dates and ultimately marries Leeta, a Bajoran Dabo girl.
Klingon Scientists Get No Respect: The Ferengi value business acumen above all else, and tend to shun anyone who doesn't thrive in the cut-throat world of business. Unfortunately, for Rom, he's a terrible businessman, but a great engineer. Once he joins Chief O'Brien's maintenance crew, he blossoms.
Klingons Love Shakespeare: By Lower Decks, Rom seems to love baseball almost as much as Sisko, even mentioning that he has batting cages in his palace.
Loser Son of Loser Dad: His and Quark's father wasn't a very successful businessman, and Rom isn't so great at business either. Eventually subverted when Rom becomes the Grand Nagus.
Love Makes You Stupid: How he wound up as a single father working for his brother. Ferengi marriages aren't exactly like human marriages - there's contracts involved. Rom was so head-over-heels with Nog's mother he never bothered checking the revised contract, and got swindled for all his money, and promptly dumped.
Quark: Hooray for romance!
Momma's Boy: Much to Quark's annoyance. Rom calls Ishka "Moogie". Ironically, Ishka is quick to point out that, while Rom has greater affection for his mother, Quark is the most like her in personality and financial skills.
Mr. Fixit: Because Quark is so cheap when it comes to repairs, Rom has to be ridiculously inventive to keep everything running smoothly. For example, he uses a spatula as a key conductor in the holosuite's mechanisms (a mesh of Federation, Ferengi, and Cardassian technology only he understands).
Nice Guy: While as self-centered and vicious as the worst Ferengi in early episodes (albeit bad at it), he evolved into this in later seasons. He once gave the entirety of his net worth to a fund for war orphans.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Zig-zagged; Rom is genuinely kind of a ditz, but he's more capable and cunning than he lets on, if his engineering skills are any indication. As such, he's aware of his goofy reputation and has no problem playing it up if it gives him an advantage. There's been more than one occasion where Rom got away with something scot-free because nobody thought he'd be smart enough to try it. Just remember that the ditziness isn't completely an act. In Lower Decks, he uses this as part of a Secret Test of Character when Freeman and Vassery are trying to bring Ferenginar into the Federation.
Papa Wolf: Mess with Nog at your peril. When Quark sabotages Nog's Starfleet admittance test, Rom was furious. Even though all the rest of the time he's completely dominated by Quark, he went as far as to threaten to burn the bar down because he cares more about Nog's happiness than anything.
Real Men Wear Pink: Provides Quark with sage advice for passing himself off as a woman. In fact, Rom almost knows too much about the subject.
Simpleton Voice: After his first appearance.
So Proud of You: He's immensely proud of Nog for joining Starfleet and becoming a soldier.
Throw the Dog a Bone: After years of poor luck, Rom gets made Grand Naugus in the second-to-last episode.
Took a Level in Kindness: Season One Rom was as unscrupulous as his brother—if a little slow on the uptake—with a penchant for fobbing work off on his son.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Eventually marries Dabo girl Leeta.
Pretty much everyone considers this a Crack Pairing in-universe, for varying reasons.
By Ferengi standards, Rom is considered something of a Brainless Beauty, though.
When they start to get serious, he starts to have doubts about his good luck and starts to suspect she's after his money. When she's still interested after he donates it all to charity, he knows she's the real deal.
Undying Loyalty: He may not impress on first impressions, but you can trust Rom with your life. Or, as O'Brien learned in "The Assignment", the life of your wife.
Walking Disaster Area: An absolute menace on the baseball field, resulting in bat-related injuries for the entire team. (His jersey number is 13.)