Abhorrent Admirer: Has this vibe with the entire study group, but mainly Jeff and Shirley.
Aborted Arc: During the second season when seen talking to himself he was supposed to be talking to his twin sister Connie, who he ate in utero. Eventually she was supposed to show up in the "flesh" and they were to kiss. However, the creator and writers thought it maybe going too far.
And Starring: With Ken Jeong.
Animal Motif: Invoked, Chang gives himself a tiger motif. Chang refers to himself as "El Tigre" during Season 1, with his paintball gun in the Paintball Episode even being orange with tiger stripes. He also wore a jacket with a tiger emblem on it.
Apathetic Teacher: When he's not being a Sadist Teacher.
The Artifact: The final two seasons bend over backwards to keep Chang in the main cast, even though his continued presence in the show raises multiple questions. Sometime during the Time Skip between Seasons 4 and 5, he manages to get let out of prison on a work release (despite nearly committing a deadly act of terrorism), he manages to get a job as a math professor at Greendale (despite previously trying to blow up the school), and he manages to get invited to join the "Save Greendale" committee (even though none of the other committee members particularly like him, and they all know that he's seriously mentally disturbed). It doesn't make a lot of sense, but he was a popular character who'd been around since Season 1, and there were some positions that needed to be filled after several of the other main cast members had left, so he was allowed to stick around for old time's sake. He even lampshades it in "Basic Email Security":
Elroy: This was a study group?
Abed: Yeah, Chang was our teacher.
Elroy and Frankie: WHAT?!
Chang: That's right! And frankly, haven't been well-utilized since!
Ax-Crazy: He's a psycho, to say the least.
Badass in a Nice Suit: Dresses himself in black slacks and white shirt and coat during the Season 1 Paintball Episode.
Becoming the Mask: In Season 4, "Kevin" starts off as just a way to let Chang infiltrate Greendale to help City College crush them and allow Chang to gain revenge for being rejected. However, in "Heroic Origins", Abed convinces him that, no matter what his motives, "Kevin" is a legitimately better person now and both Greendale and the study group are giving him a second chance to turn his life around and be included.
Big Bad: The closest thing to a main antagonist the show has, although he only actually assumes the villain role for the last few episodes of Season 3.
Big Bad Ensemble: Becomes the main threat in Season 3 as he takes over Greendale, while Vice Dean Laybourne tries to get Troy to join the AC Repair Annex.
The Blind Leading the Blind: As it turns out he does not actually know Spanish. At one point, he was teaching them Klingon.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: He is an outright Sadist Teacher but even with all the complaints about his conduct they can't fire him because as mentioned in "Environmental Science" he is the only Spanish teacher around. Subverted when it turns out he doesn't actually know any Spanish.
Butt-Monkey: Not so much in Season 1, but in Season 2 almost nothing ever seems to go right for him. Not that he doesn't often bring it on himself.
Celeb Crush: On Nathan Fillion, as he reveals in "Geothermal Escapism".
Celebrity Paradox: Jeff and Annie make a Take That! to the Marvel Cinematic Universe during the Grand Finale. Ken Jeong appeared in Avengers: Endgame along with Yvette Nicole Brown.
Characterization Marches On: While always a hammy Jerkass, in Season 1 he is competent enough to fake his way into being a Spanish teacher and also shows glimmers of having a more normal personal life than most of the study group. Come Season 2 and being an idiot and a loser are among his biggest defining traits for the rest of the series.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: Anytime the Study Group show the remotest sign of trust in him, expect him to betray them before too long. To the point where at the end of Season 5, Chang betraying the rest of the group is apparently on the "Save Greendale" committee's To-Do list.
In "A Fistful of Paintballs", he kept switching sides.
Cloudcuckoolander: Chang's mind truly is an enigma.
Coming-Out Story: Parodied in the finale, where he tearfully comes out as "legit gay" despite only fleeting implications throughout the series that he was Ambiguously Bi.
Convenient Replacement Character: While he's been on the show from the beginning, it's not until the episode after Troy leaves that he officially joins the main group, right down to sitting in Troy's seat. He also fills a similar narrative purpose, being the resident ditz and Cloudcuckoolander, and even begins hanging with the group outside of school more often.
Cut His Heart Out with a Spoon: While playing an Anthropomorphic Personification of drugs "Celebrity Pharmacology", Chang starts threatening the families of the kids watching.
Chang: I'll deep fry your dog and eat your mom's face! I'm gonna wear your little brother's SKIN like pajamas!
The Ditz: In later seasons, he takes over Troy's role as the least intelligent member of the group.
The Dragon: To Dean Pelton's Big Bad in the paintball game in "Modern Warfare". Downplayed in that the only person we actually see him take out is Britta.
Dragon-in-Chief: In Season 3 he uses a squad of youth to take over Greendale, where he enforces ludicrous policies upon the school as de facto commander with his fake dean acting as a powerless figurehead.
Drunk with Power: Putting Ben Chang in a position of authority (however trivial) is not a good idea, as it tends to lead to this trope. In Season 1, he basically abuses and flaunts his power and authority over his students in bullying, sadistic and at-times creepy ways. In Season 3, after spending the previous season as the Butt-Monkey, he's made a campus security guard, which gradually sees him become Head of Security when all the other guards quit. And that leads to Chang becoming, in the words of Jeff, "a psychotic wanna-be warlord."
Easily Forgiven: Lampshaded by Jeff in Season 4; despite the fact that he kidnapped the Dean and nearly blew up the school, the study group and dean are willing to believe in "Kevin" and Changnesia. Deconstructed in Season 5 when the group files a lawsuit against the Dean for hiring him again as a math teacher.
Epic Rocking: Performs key-tar solos that typically last nine minutes, and does so regularly enough that Abed knows how long one can be expected to last.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
Ben has a fairly good relationship with his brother, who is a rabbi. While they question their life professions, Ben will punch anyone in the face who draws a swastika, even if by accident.
He never stopped loving his wife Alessandra, even after she kicked him out for sleeping with Shirley on Halloween. Jeff nearly busts him for Changnesia being fake by bringing her to an event about "Kevin" and revealing he's been calling her repeatedly. Chang visibly goes Oh, Crap! when he sees her again and realizes his cover is nearly blown.
Even Evil Has Standards: He looks visibly guilty when lying to Alessandra that he doesn't remember her and she's hopeful they can reconcile. "Kevin" knows that Benjamin Chang was an awful person, and admits as such, because what kind of person would throw away a chance to reconcile with his wife?
Everything Is Racist: Chang is rather sensitive to racism and tends to see it even if it's not there. However, this almost only applies when the perceived racism is towards him; he has no problem making racist comments towards Shirley, Troy, Annie and Abed.
Evil Laugh: Has a very evil laugh and a tendency to employ it when going completely insane.
Faking Amnesia: Or as he calls it, Changnesia. His scheme in Season 4 is to be "Kevin" and infiltrate Greendale to help Dean Spreck. It doesn't work because Jeff has been watching him after failing to prove that Changnesia is fake, and the Dean's plan is pretty nonsensical.
Flanderization: Starts out as a dick with some quirks. In later seasons, he becomes outright antagonistic, and even further down the road, his quirkiness evolves into full-on Cloud Cuckoolander tendencies.
Foil: To Jeff. As revealed near the end of Season 1: he's spent years faking his way through his teaching job with a phony teaching degree, just like Jeff spent years faking his way through his legal career with a phony law degree; he's even forced to enroll at Greendale when he gets caught, just like Jeff. But while Jeff is (mostly) humbled by his experiences, and manages to make the best of his situation by forming lasting friendships with his classmates, Chang just goes further and further off the deep end until he tries to conquer Greendale by force.
Freudian Excuse: "Heroic Origins" suggests that his Sanity Slippage might stem from a dose of "experimental monkey fever" he caught from Annie's Boobs.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He takes over the role from the recently deceased Pierce when he finally joins the group in Season 5.
From Nobody to Nightmare: From a fake teacher to an insane student to a maniacal warlord.
Hair-Trigger Temper: The slightest insult — or innocent thing he irrationally takes to be an insult — can set him off into a tantrum.
Upon being informed in "Social Psychology" that the experiment was going to start late he immediately exploded in a violent, childish temper tantrum, involving throwing furniture and screaming "MOMMY!" Since the purpose of the experiment was to test how long people would put up with being delayed before exploding, Professor Duncan was quite pleased:
Duncan: Houston, we have an idiot.
Heel–Face Turn: Starts in Season 5 when he finally joins the study group/Save Greendale Committee. He does relapse in the finale, but by the time Season 6 comes, he truly becomes one of them.
Hell-Bent for Leather: Season 1 saw him wearing a black leather jacket with a tiger on the back in a few episodes, especially in "Communication Studies" at the Valentine's Day Dance.
Hidden Depths:
"Modern Warfare" reveals that he enjoys arts and crafts and apparently paints watercolors.
He met his wife in a salsa club.
He is a decent actor and almost becomes a movie star before insulting Steven Spielberg.
Honorary True Companion: As of "Heroic Origins", Abed realizes that Chang handing out fliers at Yogurts-burgh is what brought them all to Greendale. He invites Chang along for some fro-yo and tells him he's actually been part of the group all along.
Humble Goal: "Heroic Origins" reveals that, for all his increasingly grandiose Jerkass nature and scheming, when it comes down to it all he really wants is to be included by the study group, as was his main goal in Season 2.
Hypocrite: In the first season especially, Chang is hyper-defensive regarding any hint of racism and stereotyping directed towards himself, but has little problem making racist statements about others, in particular members of the study group. Furthermore, despite his lengthy "I AM A SPANISH GENIUS!" rant about breaking stereotypes around Asian people by teaching Spanish, most his expressions of interest in Spanish culture rarely go beyond the stereotypical (dressing as a matador, wearing sombreros, etc.).
Incoming Ham: He enters plenty of scenes in the most hammy, loud way possible.
Chang: Did someone say CRAZY PERSOOOOOOOOOOOOOOON?!
Everyone Else: No.
Chang: Well, I heard it.
Ineffectual Sympathetic Villain: In Season 2. While still an asshat, there are numerous scenes showing him as lonely and pathetic.
Insane Troll Logic: When we get to hear his thoughts things go from bizarre to outright surreal.
Jerkass: He's not a particularly nice person.
Jerkass Has a Point: When Star-Burns protests over Chang referring to him as 'Star-Burns' rather than 'Alex', Chang counters that a guy who spends hours sculpting his side-burns into massive star-shapes doesn't really get to whine if people latch onto them as a nickname.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Very, very rarely. For the most part, he's just a straight-up Jerkass.
I Just Want to Have Friends: For most of Season 2, all he wants is to join the study group.
Karma Houdini: In the Season 5 finale, Chang gets away with betraying the study group and even takes the million dollars entrusted to him by the school board for himself.
Karma Houdini Warranty: Manages to avoid any punishment for his crimes in Season 3 by Faking Amnesia all throughout Season 4. In the Season 5 premiere, he reveals he owned up to his mistakes and briefly went to jail, and is now out on work release.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: The reason his debut has him shout "I AM A SPANISH GENIUS!". The Season 1 finale reveals he knows less about Spanish than his students, and was at one point teaching them Klingon.
Large Ham: The biggest one on the show, given his tendency to get very, very melodramatic about things.
Laser-Guided Amnesia: In Season 4. And of course it turns out he's just faking all of it in "Advanced Documentary Filmmaking".
Last-Name Basis: Pretty much everyone just calls him Chang, largely due to his constant Smurfing.
Late-Arrival Spoiler: Chang's role in the show changes from season to season, so it's often hard to describe what he's doing without spoiling the previous season for anyone who hasn't already seen it.
Lethally Stupid: He almost burns down the whole school and everybody in it when he tries to kill the study group with fireworks in "The First Chang Dynasty".
Chang: Fire can't go through doors, stupid. It's not a ghost!
The Mentally Disturbed: Starting in Season 2, escalating in Season 3. Eventually lampshaded by Chang himself in Season 5 when he betrays the group again, stating that he's probably just mentally ill.
The Mole: Chang is one for City College in Season 4.
Morality Chain: Alessandra was this for him. He wasn't great before, but he goes off the deep end after she kicks him out.
My God, What Have I Done?: He is guilty about lying to Alessandra that he doesn't remember her, despite her being eager to help him regain his memories, as shown by his Oh, Crap! when she appears at his event. This is why he goes easy on Jeff for trying to bust him for Faking Amnesia, because he knows Jeff is absolutely right that he is lying and in other circumstances, he would have won his wife back.
The Nicknamer: He is the originator of Star-Burns' nickname. During Season 1, he also has a tendency to bestow racist nicknames on his students.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Acting stupid isn't difficult for him, but he can act even more imbecilic than he is at times in order to fool people. Particularly as "Kevin" in Season 4.
Out of Focus: His screen time is reduced partway through Season 3, almost to Demoted to Extra levels, but this was All According to Plan. Chang spends Season 3 slowly gaining power before reappearing as the brand spanking new Big Bad.
Panicky Expectant Father: At least until it turns out the child wasn't his. And in his case, interestingly enough, the issue was not that he was having a child, it was if he would get to be the child's father. Completely subverted when Shirley gives birth, where he becomes rather soothing and very helpful in calming Shirley down.
Pet the Dog: After Jeff becomes a pariah for failing to expose that Kevin is Faking Amnesia, Chang sits with him at lunch and sincerely says he has every right to be cynical, since Benjamin Chang was an awful person, and helps him reconcile with his friends. It would have been better for Chang if Jeff had remained ostracized.
Psychopathic Manchild: There's a reason that, in the third season, Chang's army is made up entirely of twelve-year-old boys.
Pungeon Master: He "chang"-ifies alot, most notably when coining the name of his disease Changnesia.
Sadistic Choice: He faces one when Jeff reintroduces him to his wife and asks if he remembers her. Either he can admit that he misses her and remembers her despite supposedly having Changnesia, or keep playing dumb and miss the chance to reconcile with the love of his life. Chang chooses the latter, with a regretful expression.
Sadist Teacher:
In "Environmental Science", he drags Annie out of his classroom for failing to put her pencil down at the end of a test, assigns an essay to the rest of the class as punishment, extends the length of the essay every time a student says something (eventually coming to "TWENTY PAGES, EN ESPAÑOL, ON ASS-KISSING!"), makes it worth thirty percent of the students' overall grade for the class, sets it due the following Monday (despite the class being an introductory Spanish class), and promises to follow it immediately with "a big-ass quiz." He also openly insults nearly every student in the class on a regular basis (see his explanation of "Usted" on the Quotes page). Apparently, the school has been trying to fire him for years, but couldn't because nobody wanted his job.He eventually gets fired when Annie exposes to the Dean a tape recording of Chang admitting that he doesn't have any teaching credentials. Or Spanish credentials.
Most of the scenes involving him appearing in a teaching capacity generally tended to involve him abusing, insulting, ranting at or on some occasions even borderline molesting his students.
Sanity Slippage: Progressively throughout Seasons 2 and 3. Not that he was very sane to begin with.
Second Episode Introduction: He does not appear in the pilot episode.
Sixth Ranger: At least, he would very much like to be this. The Study Group isn't having any of it, however. At least until Season 5, when they finally accept him as one of their own.
Small Name, Big Ego: He has an incredibly inflated sense of his own skills, talents and importance to the world.
Smurfing
He takes to replacing words that rhyme with Chang and the word "change" (or, eventually, just random words/parts of words in general) with "Chang", much to everyone's disgust.
Jeff: It's not even clever! You keep using it as the word "change"!
(later)
Jeff: It makes me so CHANGRY! Oh God, now I'm doing it too.
Even the advertising gets in on it.
Season 3.5 Trailer: ...AND EVERYTHING WE KNOW... WILL CHANG!
From the end of "Regional Holiday Music"
"Merry, merry, merry, merry Chang-mas"
Stalker with a Crush: To the entire study group in Season 2; he really, really wants to be part of the group.
Stock Foreign Name: His last name, Chang.
Stupid Evil: Deconstructed. He is dumb which means Annie eventually records him admitting he's not a certified Spanish teacher to Jeff. It also means he's nearly set the school on fire and attempted to blow it up twice, which would have gotten him killed as well as hundreds of others, including children and the School Board members who like him. Then, instead of staying on the lam, he risks going back to jail to help the City College Dean infiltrate Greendale as an amnesiac. Jeff figured out he was faking it but couldn't prove it, so he backs off and merely watches him.
The Team Wannabe: Something even recognized by the study group. When making a diorama of themselves making a diorama, they include a figurine of Chang peering at them from outside the study room.
Throw the Dog a Bone: Two pretty notable ones in Season 6. After spending the majority of the series as a hapless Butt-Monkey he pulls off a powerful performance in a stage production of The Karate Kid and saves the day with a rousing speech at Garrett's wedding. Both events earned him praise and respect from the group.
Token Evil Teammate: Given his tendency to turn on the group at the drop of a hat.
Took a Level in Dumbass: In Season 1, he's somewhat incompetent but still bright enough to fake his way into being a teacher. By Season 3, he actually believes fire can't travel through doors because "it's not a ghost".
Took a Level in Jerkass: From annoying and inept teacher to insane attempted murderer.
Took a Level in Kindness: He's less overtly dickish in Season 5, although he does end up betraying the Save Greendale committee once again at the very end. Season 6 has him at his least jerkish and he gets several Pet the Dog moments in return.
Chang: I like this group. I'm at my best when I'm with you guys.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Lampshaded by Jeff. She is also significantly taller than he.
Villain Song: A Boastful Rap entirely about himself and how awesome he is, which he even plays in class.
Vitriolic Best Buds: His relationship with Duncan following "The Psychology of Letting Go" has elements of this.
You Are What You Hate: Uses "gay" as an insult multiple times throughout the series (including a scene where he has his arm around a drag queen), but he tearfully comes out as gay unprompted in the series finale.