Abhorrent Admirer: To Jeff, though not so much in appearance (he's actually pretty attractive when not crossdressing or wearing his unflattering day-job outfit) but for the facts that A) Jeff is straight, and B) the Dean is rather willfully ignorant of how unwanted his advances are.
Ambiguously Bi: For the first few seasons, though he seemed like a standard case of being in the Transparent Closet, some moments hint at an attraction to women as well as men. His comment during a trial, "I go both ways", could be taken as a Freudian Slip; he seemed to be keen on the idea of a potential three-way with Jeff and Slater; and he included male and female students in his "hotness ranking". Laybourne also calls him a "pansexual imp". In Season 6, it's revealed that his sexuality is closest to Laybourne's description; but he's uncomfortable putting a label on it.
Bi-Wildered: He exhibits Extreme Omnisexual tendencies and has no objections to being described as a "pansexual imp." But as a publicity stunt to circumvent consequences for their homophobia, the school board pressures him to label himself as exclusively gay, much to his distress.
Breakout Character: Was eventually promoted to the main cast due to his popularity with the fans.
Camp Gay: His sexuality is so complex that the school board asking him to pretend that he is "just" gay for publicity causes him angst and pent-up stress. In his own words:
Dean: If coming out is a magic show and gayness is a rabbit coming out of a hat, I'm one of those never-ending handkerchiefs.
Catchphrase: Uses "Dean" in nearly every word he can make a (sometimes barely) passable pun out of. At times it borders on being a Verbal Tic. But not on the weekends. Off-work he's just a Craig-ular guy.
Celebrity Paradox:
Friends was frequently mentioned throughout the show's run. Jim Rash notably guest-starred during the show's Grand Finale.
The show makes frequent jabs at Glee. Jim Rash was a frequent guest-star during its last two seasons.
Jeff and Annie make a Take That! to the Marvel Cinematic Universe during the Grand Finale. Jim Rash appeared in Captain America: Civil War as a college dean.
Characterization Marches On: Dean Pelton was simply midly quirky in his appearances in the first season, and generally acted like a traditional authority figure who took his job seriously (even if he wasn't very good at it). He later would become far more of a campy loon who is overly obsessed with his own self-image and his blatant favoritism towards the Study Group, particularly with his obvious crush on Jeff.
Character Tic: Whenever he's lying, nervous, or expecting/receiving backlash for his actions, he tends to touch his chin / cheek.
Upon turning to exit the study room he will casually place his hand on Jeff's chest.
Cloudcuckoolander: Rather lovably quirky with his hobbies and fetishes.
Costume Porn: To the point he has a whole closet full of costumes in his office.
Creepy Crossdresser or Wholesome Crossdresser: Especially from Season 2 onwards. A lot of his costumes are dresses. Even a few of his male costumes are rather... Stripperific, and were clearly meant to be worn by women.
Distracted by the Sexy: Dean Pelton has a hard time resisting his lust for Jeff regardless of the situation.
Dogged Nice Guy: He can be seen this way. His conduct towards Jeff is definitely inappropriate, but Jeff clearly considers him more or less harmless and he's a pretty likable and sympathetic character in many ways.
Drop-In Character:
Jeff: We were debating how many times a year a man can drop in a study room in a dumb costume with irrelevant news.
Everyone Calls Him "Barkeep": Most of the time he is referred to as Dean Pelton, or just Dean.
Though Jeff tends to call him by his first name whenever he is being deadly serious about something.
Extracurricular Enthusiast: Dean Pelton fits this to a T. There is no school activity/event that he can't get excited about. And wear a ridiculous costume to promote.
Fake Guest Star: In the first two seasons, Jim Rash is credited as a guest star despite the Dean appearing in nearly every episode and often driving the plot (not to mention being the very first main character introduced).
Flanderization:
The Dean progresses from being a mildly eccentric supporting character to an outrageously camp character almost constantly wearing ridiculous outfits. This is even parodied several times in Seasons 2 and 3, including a montage of various costumes and a comment from him when dressed as a half man half woman that he may have gone too far.
His attraction to Jeff starts as a slight crush, but gradually gets to the point of outright sexual harassment and stalking. Notably, one Season 1 episode reveals that he keeps a ranked list of the students and faculty at Greendale who he finds most attractive, and Jeff is "only" second on the list; that would be pretty unthinkable in later seasons, where his attraction to Jeff borders on Single-Target Sexuality. By Season 3 he gets aroused at the sight of Jeff's shadow and passes out from ecstasy if he touches his shoulder.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Sanguine
The Friend Nobody Likes: Downplayed. While they don't dislike him, the study group only just barely seem to tolerate him more often than not, and when the Save Greendale Committee is formed, their first order of business is to ban the Dean from attending their meetings.
Furry Fandom: He's got this thing for Dalmatians.
Dean: This better not awaken anything in me...
A God Am I: He becomes all about this after buying, and becoming addicted to using, an extremely lame virtual reality rig, in which the act of opening an ordinary file suddenly becomes an epic demonstration of his godliness.
Has a Type: He's consistently attracted to people with dominant and traditionally "masculine" personalities. He has his crush on Jeff, implied he was attracted to Troy, the only women he's shown to potentially be into are Slater and Frankie; and he has very sensual reactions to domineering men like Laybourne and Dean Spreck. He can hardly stand being in a fake tabloid relationship with the very attractive but effeminate Domingo. His other type is anyone in a dalmation costume.
Hidden Depths: Beneath his flamboyant and quirky exterior, Dean Pelton genuinely cares about Greendale and wants to do it justice. This is best exemplified in "Documentary Filmmaking: Redux" (where he goes overboard in trying to create a perfect commercial to promote Greendale) and the last two episodes of season 5 (where he becomes distraught when he learns that Greendale is going to be stripped down and rebranded as "Subway University")
Inadvertent Entrance Cue: A particular specialty of his is to appear whenever the word "Dean", or something that just sounds close enough is spoken. Though it may not be so inadvertent after all, if "Cooperative Escapism in Familial Relations" is to be believed. Apparently, he listens in on the study group's conversations with a cup to the wall.
Jerkass Ball: In the episode "Documentary Filmmaking: Redux", and also took a level in crazy.
Jerkass to One:
He's inexplicably catty towards Britta.
Very much dislikes Domingo, the man acting as his partner during his publicity tour as a "Gay Dean"; and isn't shy about letting him know.
Large Ham: He can get really dramatic about things. His reaction to seeing Jeff in sunglasses deserves some mention.
Lethally Stupid: The Zombie Apocalypse in "Epidemiology" happened because the Dean thought hazardous experimental material from a military surplus store was taco meat with a goofy label. Not to mention hiring people like Chang.
Manipulative Bastard: For somebody normally so incompetent, he's very good at using blackmail and bribes to get the student body in general (and particularly Jeff and Annie) to do what he wants.
Mike Nelson, Destroyer of Worlds: Played with in "Epidemiology"; the Dean's actions are what helped prevent an Apocalypse How.
Political Overcorrectness: Has a tendency to slip into this, causing the creation of the "Greendale Human Being" (Jeff: "I think not being racist is the new racism") and the non-denominational Mr. Winter ("Merry Happy!"). This habit of his is also apparently the reason the degreeless Chang got the Spanish teaching position—Pelton was afraid of being called a racist for asking an Asian man for Spanish credentials.
Promotion to Opening Titles: Starting in Season 3.
Pungeon Master: He loves finding new ways to work the word "Dean" into his sentences.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: He becomes more contemptuous of Britta as the seasons progress.
Stalker with a Crush: Quite a few plots are instigated by the Dean wanting to get… closer to Jeff.
Stepford Smiler: We see in "Documentary Filmmaking: Redux" that organizing events is the only way that he can make Greendale and himself feel less like a failure.
Teacher's Pet: Inverted; the study group don't spend a lot of time sucking up to him and actually downright resent the very idea of being considered his favourite students, but they're his most beloved attendees in the entire college and he utterly adores them. Particularly Jeff.
Tempting Fate: He can be summoned when other characters tempt fate.
Took a Level in Badass: In "Modern Espionage". He was completely useless in the previous paintball episodes (although, to be fair, he wasn't exactly participating back then, but still). This time he "survives" until the end along with Jeff.
Took a Level in Dumbass: Bordering on Too Dumb to Live in Seasons 5 and 6.
Transparent Closet: Really, really transparent, but he never explicitly acknowledges his sexuality until Season 6, where he states that he's not openly gay because he's "not openly anything and gay doesn't begin to cover it."
Unlimited Wardrobe: As a Running Gag, his office is stocked with a seemingly boundless array of costumes that he'll take any opportunity to wear, no matter how slight.