Abhorrent Admirer: To Britta. The abhorrent part comes from the manipulative and self-serving ways he plans to get with her throughout the series, despite Britta’s clear lack of interest in him. This comes to a head and is eventually resolved in "Bondage and Beta Male Sexuality", in which he weasels his way into being alone with her while she’s having an existential crisis. However, instead of taking advantage of her, he has a change of heart and lets the idea go. He does momentarily regret it though, after Britta admits that she was vulnerable enough to have consented if he had tried to hit on her.
The Alcoholic: He likes his booze a little too much.
Animal Motifs: Jeff compares him to a Hyena in "Advanced Criminal Law" in response to him asking if he and Britta are an item.
Jeff; [to Duncan] You know, you have the savoir faire of a hyena. How is it that you and James Bond come from the same island?
Duncan: Message received. I'll just wait for you to finish striking out first.
Apathetic Teacher: Certainly as an anthropology teacher, he very visibly cannot give two whole shits about the subject or teaching anything worthwhile about it, to the extent that he doesn't even buy the textbook since it's too expensive, spends entire weeks playing YouTube videos, improvises a class of anesthesiology at one point simply because a pretty student got the room number wrong and sets the final exam as simply an excuse for everyone to drink. It's possible that he improves when he's actually teaching psychology, but considering he once expressed his astonishment at learning what anthropology actually was by exclaiming he'd "thought psychology was a dodge", it's very unlikely.
Because You Were Nice to Me: Jeff in his lawyer days helped Professor Duncan get out of a legal scrape involving driving. For that reason, Duncan treats him nicely compared to everyone else. As he admits, he owes Jeff for saving his butt.
British Teeth: A go-to insult by others.
The Bus Came Back: He returns in Season 5 after disappearing near the end of Season 2 and being absent for the entirety of Seasons 3 and 4. He was then Put on a Bus again for the final season.
Characterization Marches On: The pilot portrays him as a Psychologist Teacher and Trickster Mentor trying to get Jeff to give up his Manipulative Bastard ways—a stark contrast to the sleazy Apathetic Teacher he eventually became.
Chuck Cunningham Syndrome: Quietly disappears after Season 2. This is duly lampshaded in Season 4's "Intro to Felt Surrogacy":
Troy: Has anyone else noticed Professor Duncan hasn't been around for a long time?
He finally returns in Season 5's "Basic Intergluteal Numismatics" only to disappear again in Season 6.
Demoted to Extra: The character was initially featured in early promotional material as the main professor character in the show, but after a handful of episodes he disappeared, with Chang essentially taking his place. Oliver returned in the Season 1 finale and was the professor for their anthropology class as a Recurring Character in Season 2. This was the result of Oliver's decision to not become a regular cast member because he didn't want to leave The Daily Show (the two programs are filmed on opposite sides of the country) and Ken Jeong's breakout role in The Hangover in the interim between pilot and broadcast.
Dr. Jerk: Well, amoral psychologist that's described by John Oliver as a combination of narcissism and self-loathing.
Early-Installment Weirdness: In the pilot he was the Only Sane Man of the ensemble who advised Jeff to not try and cheat his way through his college career. That vanished when he conducted a cruel psychological study with Annie helping him.
Fake Nationality: A borderline In-Universe example: Duncan does have a British accent and was born in the UK, but has spent most of his life in America. When he tries invoking any British stereotypes or talk using words commonly used in British English, it always comes out as wrong or at least a bit forced.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: The Melancholic.
Freudian Excuse: When pressed enough (or drunk enough) Duncan reveals himself to be a very lonely man with some unprocessed childhood trauma.
Abed: [responding to Duncan reliving childhood memories] Where's your dad? It's Christmas, professor. Where's your dad?
Duncan: I DON'T KNOW! We never know! Mum won't stop crying! I'm going to America with Grandma! [sobs]
Hidden Depths: Apparently plays piano—and plays it well—for the Glee Club.
Hoist by His Own Petard: His attempt to establish "The Duncan Principle"note  ends with him becoming the victim of said principle when Abed sits there for twenty-six hours waiting for the meeting he's been told to expect.
Jerkass: In between his alcoholism, his rather amoral and inept approach to psychiatry and his overall pompous, self-serving nature, Duncan is all in all a bit of a self-righteous prick, although not entirely without his sympathetic or decent side. He ends his run on the show squarely in Jerk with a Heart of Gold territory, however.
Laser-Guided Karma: In "Applied Anthropology and Culinary Arts", he sets the final exam as an excuse for everyone to drink, orders Annie bullied down when she queries the fairness of automatically passing everyone regardless of merit, and gleefully revels in keeping the fact that Anthropology has been a complete dodge of a class all year from the Dean. So, of course, the Dean chooses the exact moment when he's happily toasting this to walk in and completely scuttle his plans.
The fact that Abed tends to turn his psychoanalysis back on him can be considered this, since his profession tends to bring out his dickish side.
Pet the Dog: He's in this mode in retrospect during the pilot, where he advises Jeff to earn his degree honorably and does an ultimately harmless Secret Test of Character. Justified in that Jeff helped him get out of a legal scrape before the start of the show.
Professor Guinea Pig: An inadvertent example; every time he tries plying his trade on Abed, Abed somehow manages to turn it back on him.
Psycho Psychologist: Nonlethal version, but Duncan has been shown to run ethically questionable experiments and lure patients into therapy for ulterior motives (hitting on them and getting publication material for a case).
Put on a Bus: He is absent in Seasons 3, 4 and 6.
Sixth Ranger: In Season 5, he's the only new addition to the Save Greendale committee that wasn't a Convenient Replacement Character to anyone who left.
Son of a Whore: By his own admission. This caused an awkward moment between him and Hickey when it's revealed that Hickey could possibly be his father. He's not, but it's very likely that Hickey is the father of Duncan's cousin.
Stiff Upper Lip: Averted. Duncan is a Sore Loser, has almost no resolve, and is fairly easily pushed into emotional breakdowns. In "Social Psychology" he even throws a full-blown temper tantrum when his experiment ends up backfiring on him.
Took a Level in Kindness: When he returns in Season 5 he's a lot nicer and more sympathetic than many of his previous appearances. This is particularly displayed in "Bondage and Beta Male Sexuality", where he decides not to take advantage of Britta while she's in a vulnerable state, instead driving her home and giving her a pep talk to demonstrate that her life does have meaning. Additionally, the preexisting friendship established between him and Jeff in the pilot episode is explored and developed more than it was in either of the first two seasons.
Two First Names: Both the actor and the character.
Vitriolic Best Buds: His interaction with Chang following "The Psychology of Letting Go" has elements of this.
What Happened to the Mouse?: He's not mentioned at all in Season 6, leaving his outcome uncertain. But since Shirley, Troy, Pierce, and even Hickey are name-dropped here and there throughout the season in the spirit of honoring former members of the group, the lack of acknowledgement of Duncan may mean that he's still working at Greendale, and is just Out of Focus again, so that the main characters aren't in a position to "miss him" as such. This is seemingly confirmed by a shot of Abed cleaning a door with Duncan's nameplate on it, though, given the general maintenance standards at Greendale, seeing his nameplate still on a door doesn't necessarily confirm anything.