Accidental Misnaming: Pierce routinely mispronounces Abed's name as "Ay-bed".
Adam Westing: Up until the beginning of 2011 or so, Chevy Chase was absolutely notorious for being difficult to work with. He briefly turned it around, but Pierce's general Jerkassness can be seen as him essentially playing who he thinks he used to be. Alternatively, this could be seen as the producers of the show lampooning Chase, since several behind-the-scenes reports (most notably the feud between Chase and Dan Harmon, although the same reports in that case also suggested that Harmon himself wasn't exactly blameless in the situation either) have suggested that Chase isn't exactly the easiest person to work with or the most popular person on set.
Alternate Character Interpretation: An in-universe example; the characters themselves go backwards and forwards on whether Pierce is just an irredeemable Jerkass or whether it's the fact that people treat him like a fool that makes him act out that way. Jeff usually takes the former interpretation, Annie the latter.
Ambiguously Bi: For all of his homophobia and calling Jeff gay, he is annoyed when Abed says that there’s no special connection between the two of them in "Paradigms Of Human Memory".
Not to mention his comments in Remedial Chaos Theory about pizza guys getting worse and worse looking, with all the good ones going into porn.
In one episode, he asks the rest of the study group if he has a shot with any of them, and is disappointed when they all shake their heads.
And Starring: And Chevy Chase during the opening credits.
Bad Guys Do the Dirty Work: He considers himself the guy who does or says what everyone else wants, but isn't willing to.
Berserk Button: A double subversion occurs in "Accounting for Lawyers" when Pierce fails to guess another man's Berserk Button, but in fact has just mentioned his own—his hair loss.
Big Bad Ensemble: With City College Dean Spreck in Season 2.
Bondage Is Bad: While he's not evil, he is a Dirty Old Man, and the fact that he has a "secret gym" in his mansion only reinforces this image.
Brick Joke: He hires LeVar Burton to meet Troy as an act of revenge in Season 2, knowing that it would cause Troy to freak out and leave him in a catatonic state during the entirety of Burton's visit. During Season 5, Burton returns, this time on a more heartwarming note, hired by Pierce posthumously to help oversee Troy's journey when he leaves Greendale.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: While Pierce is strange, bigoted, and more than a little clueless, he's occasionally shown that he is actually a fairly competent businessman.
Bus Crash: He's revealed to have died off-screen in "Basic Intergluteal Numismatics".
Butt-Monkey: If it's not Britta, it is Pierce who typically serves this role within the study group, as lampshaded in "The Art of Discourse". Season 2 deconstructs this; His resentment over his status as the group Butt Monkey causes him to lash out and antagonize the rest of the study group and other students to an increasingly disturbing degree.
Casanova Wannabe: When he tries to hit on Shirley. He alternates between this and Kavorka Man, however.
Character Development: Much of Season 3 involves him making up to his friends for his atrocious behavior in Season 2. He admits Jeff has ample reasons to hate him and decides to be the group's bad guy for his sake.
Parodied in "Introduction to Finality":
Alan: [to Jeff] This place has made you so gay.
Pierce: Hey! Don't use gay as a derogatory term. Boo-yah, good person.
Characterization Marches On: The first few episodes had him dressed more suavely with a slight Casanova Wannabe gig going on. He also showed relatively few Innocent Bigot traits than he would later on. It took only a few episodes for him to get into his established persona, however.
Church of Happyology: He describes himself as a Neo-Buddhist, but his actual beliefs put him more in this camp.
Cloudcuckoolander: By Season 3 due to senility.
Comically Missing the Point: So very, very much.
Cool Old Guy: Normally he's not, but he has his moments; normally when he stops trying to be cool. He knows his way around a scrap, plays video games, and ocassionally gives good advice. Troy, a young Big Man on Campus, seems to view him as this in early episodes; bonding with him and actively taking his life tips.
"When did Pierce become awesome?"
Cosmic Plaything: When Pierce was born, the umbilical cord was wrapped around his neck, both of his arms, and one of his ankles. The doctors eventually stopped trying to deliver him and just started laughing.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: When he really puts his mind to it, note  Pierce is a devious Manipulative Bastard and a master of the Batman Gambit. The rest of the time, well...
Death by Irony: In his will, he leaves each member of the study group a canister of his frozen sperm. At the end of the episode, it's revealed that filling these canisters caused him to die of dehydration.
Death Equals Redemption: Subverted. The group was willing to leave his memory in peace, until he turned them against each other with a posthumous polygraph test. Jeff eventually admitted that they could mourn Pierce while acknowledging he was an ass in life.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Pierce can be considered a deconstruction of the "wacky old person" character. His insensitivity makes him seem like a Jerkass, his out-of-touch outlook gets him ostracized, and his attempts to fit in turn him into an unlikeable Attention Whore. He can also be seen as a deconstruction of typical sitcom Butt-Monkey characters like Jerry, Scully, and Zoidberg; usually the oldest character in the group, lots of self-esteem issues, considered out of touch and uncool, and almost always the butt of everyone else's jokes to the point of being a Butt-Monkey. Pierce shows how this sort of treatment can eventually foster serious resentment from whoever's on the receiving end until things get ugly. Pierce lashes out at the group in increasingly mean-spirited, disturbing ways, in large part because of this treatment (he even says as much). Not that he doesn't bring it on himself most of the time, but he isn't really antagonistic until the group's treatment of him gets worse.
The Determinator: Surprisingly enough, Pierce is not one to throw in the towel easily. It's something he has in common with Britta, hence why he decides to help her out in "Herstory of Dance".
Pierce: If I ever let being bad at something stop me, I wouldn't even be here. That thing some men call failure, I call living. Breakfast. And I'm not leaving till I've cleaned out the buffet.
Dirty Old Man: He openly and hopelessly lusts after the female members of the study group (particularly Shirley, at least early on), all of whom are much younger than he is.
Pierce: So, just to be clear, I don't have a shot with any of you?
[everybody shudders and walks away]
Disproportionate Retribution: Mostly in Season 2. He believes no retribution is too harsh for those who he feels have wronged him even a little. It gets to the point where Jeff beats him up for his cruelty.
In "Asian Population Studies", he theorizes that Shirley may be pregnant with Chang's baby (which she knew nothing about) just because she voted against him on what new member to invite into the study group.
In "Intro to Political Science", he joins the race for student body president just to repeatedly publicly humiliate Vicki for not lending him her pencil.
In "Intermediate Documentary Filmmaking", he psychologically torments every other member of the study group by faking his own death and giving them "gifts" that turn each of them half-crazed. His reason for doing this is, in his own words, that they had started to exclude him more often and weren't taking him seriously.
An especially dark and borderline-sociopathic example in "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons" is him trying to take the last remaining joy away from the already severely depressed Neil, who was heavily implied to be planning his suicide after getting bullied due to his weight. Pierce, who was fully informed of this fact by the others, also proceeded to, of course, mercilessly bully him due to his weight. Why? Because Neil was invited to a game of Dungeons and Dragons (which was specifically done in an attempt to save his life), and Pierce, for reasons that should be obvious, was left out.
The Ditz: A particularly nasty example. Pierce is crass, insensitive, clueless about many things, and willfully ignorant as to the effect he has on everyone else.
Don't You Dare Pity Me!: Pierce hates the thought of anyone pitying him for any reason. Unfortunately, he's also so desperate for attention that rather than accept people's pity, he'll instead lash out in more negative ways to the point that pity ends up being the last thing anyone feels for him, even if he genuinely warrants it.
Draft Dodging: Fled to Canada to avoid fighting in the Vietnam War.
Driven by Envy: On many occasions, when he feels left out of the group's activities. This applies even if he considers said activities stupid.
Dumbass Has a Point: He shows piercing and penetrating insight every once in a while. Crosses over with Even Evil Has Standards when he tells off Jeff for being a crap friend to Britta by constantly using her name as a verb for a failure to the point where it gets old and mean rather than funny. He also predicted the staying popularity of video games.
Embarrassing First Name: His full first name is revealed to be "Piercinald".
Embarrassing Middle Name: His middle name is Anastasia.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: It's revealed that he often talks to his mother about how he feels Jeff bullies him, and tells her he has a Girlfriend in Canada.
Even Evil Has Standards:
He's horrified when Leonard's gang, the Hipsters, abandon a genuinely senile old man to take the fall for their antics in "Messianic Myths and Ancient Peoples".
Despite his blatant dislike and jealousy of Abed for most of the series, Pierce is noticeably disgusted with Professor Duncan's incessant bullying of him during his mental breakdown to the point of entering a catatonic state in "Abed's Uncontrollable Christmas".
Played for Hypocritical Humour when even he thinks Jeff accidentally implying that he thinks "all black people are in prison", is going too far.
In "Digital Estate Planning", Pierce ultimately chooses to reject his father's inheritance to allow his half-brother Gilbert Lawson to have it, as he recognizes that the amount of racist abuse he was subject to at Cornelius's hands and using a video game to torture him for existing is wrong. Pierce even admits that Cornelius refusing to acknowledge Gilbert as his son, even within the game, is worse than anything their father ever did to him.
Evil Is Hammy: In "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons", which goes hand-in-hand with his increased jerkassery.
Evil Is Petty: When pretending to overdose on pills, he plays mind games.
He's especially petty during, "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons", when he cruelly taunts Neil.
Flanderization: In Season 4, into a massive racist. Combined with Out of Focus as shown below and you get a character who does little more than spout racist one-liners before shuffling out of focus again, which was reportedly one of the main reasons Chevy Chase was increasingly frustrated with and dismissive of the show.
Forced Meme: Tries to force "streets ahead" to become hip in "Contemporary American Poultry".
For the Evulz: Buying Abed and Troy's handshake just so he can ruin it is a good example.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: The Sanguine – self-absorbed sociopath whose stereotype-buying ignorance shows in his insensitive remarks.
Freudian Excuse: Pierce is not only a product from a different time, his father was a racist, sexist, and basically every type of prejudice you can imagine from a stereotypical southern old man. With an upbringing like Pierce had it’s really no wonder he’s so messed up.
Freudian Excuse Is No Excuse: Jeff thinks so:
Annie: He's a jerk because we exclude him.
Jeff: We exclude him because he's a jerk. And the last time I checked, you were the last one feeling sorry about it.
The Friend Nobody Likes: His necessity is revealed when, in his absence, the study group begins to fight amongst each other for incredibly petty reasons just because they no longer have Pierce to kick around.
Hate Sink: Invoked in a few episodes, where it's noted that the other members of the study group tend to use Pierce as an outlet for their negative emotions. When he briefly leaves the group in "Communication Studies", the others end up squabbling with each other because they're no longer united by hatred of him. And in "Biology 101", he falsely admits to getting Jeff kicked out of Professor Kane's class to give Jeff a plausible excuse for his erratic behavior (knowing that it's easier for the group to hate him than Jeff).
Hidden Depths: In the Season 2 finale:
Pierce: You know I've been coming to this school for twelve years? I—I've never been friends with anyone here for more than a semester. Probably for the same reason I've been married seven times. I guess I assume eventually I'll get rejected, so I, you know, test people, push them until they prove me right. It's a sickness, I admit it. But, this place has always accepted me, sickness and all. This place accepted all of you. Sickness and all. It's worth thinking about.
He can play piano, even if he can't compose any original material.
He is also seen skipping in one episode.
He's actually a fairly savvy businessman. He helps Shirley get over her fear of public speaking by putting her through exercises for sales pitches, and he saw the monetary value in publishing computer games decades ago despite being told they were just a passing fad.
Innocent Bigot: Regularly says things the other characters find offensive. Generational differences play a role.
It Will Never Catch On: As an example of his business insight, he accurately predicted how big video games would be and pitched the idea to his father. Unfortunately, Cornelius didn't listen.
Jerkass: Especially crass in Season 2 when he comes dangerously close (as noted by Abed) to becoming a real-life supervillain.
Jerkass Has a Point: For all his abrasiveness and stupidity, he's right about things more often than you'd expect or that the study group might be comfortable with, particularly when it comes to the subject of how alike to him they really are deep down.
In "Asian Population Studies", after Troy argues that they shouldn't tell Shirley that she slept with Chang as her not being able to remember it is a gift, Pierce points out that not telling Shirley that Chang might be the father of her unborn baby is far worse. It's taken Up to Eleven when Pierce ultimately does tell Shirley out of spite, as he's not exactly wrong for telling her, but rather how he tells her.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: A very minor example; there are occasional glimpses of someone more likable, decent and sympathetic within Pierce, but they're buried almost impenetrably deep within a crust and outer core of insufferable Jerkass. In general, if anyone's going to reveal Pierce's nicer side, it's Annie. Season 5 has Pierce's hologram and will put him firmly in this category.
I Just Want to Have Friends: Deconstructed. What Pierce longs most for is affection and popularity, and as a result, he gets extremely jealous of other people's friendships, especially Abed and Troy's, since he really wants something similar but finds it hard to establish that kind of connection to another person. Ironically, it is his jealousy that leads him to act out in petty and vicious ways, and this in turn pushes people further away from him.
Karma Houdini Warranty: Zigzagged and heavily downplayed. While the group will call him out for being a Jerkass or ensure that he faces karma, he's allowed to stay when they realize that need a Butt-Monkey to mock. In Season 5, it's revealed his antics got him banned from Greendale and then he suffered an Undignified Death.
Kavorka Man: He's been divorced seven times. This means seven different women agreed to marry him in the first place. He also helps his friends pass Spanish by sleeping with the teacher.
Kick the Dog: He definitely crosses the line with his treatment of the depressed, suicidal Neil (who has never done anything wrong to him except sit in his chair) in "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons".
The Klutz: He manages to fall out of Jeff's chair just by sitting in it, as well as getting the most laughs at Abed's bad movie night by tripping and knocking over Chang's popcorn.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: He always acts as though he knows more than everybody else, when this is anything but the case. Troy implicitly states that he tries to look like he's not stupid, to which Pierce replies by bluntly calling himself a genius.
Laborious Laziness: Pierce would rather expend his effort to punish people for excluding him rather than actually being nice. The group calls him out for this, especially in Season 2. As shown during the "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons", if he put in the same effort to be a decent human being that he does into using the specific dungeon against the group and Neil, they wouldn't have felt the need to exclude him in the first place.
Leaning on the Fourth Wall: A particularly dark variant: as the series progresses it becomes difficult to separate Pierce's behavior from Chevy's behind-the-scenes antics, and it's entirely possible Pierce's increased ostracization may be "inspired" by Chase driving everyone else crazy. Did Pierce become more awful and irritate Chevy, or did Chevy's behavior provoke Pierce's characterization? Both? Neither?
The Load: Whenever the group does a group activity. Subverted in "Basic Human Anatomy", when he does the group's History project by himself after they all left him behind to go have their episode plots.
Also subverted in "A Few Paintballs More" when Pierce manages to win the paintball game by faking a heart attack. Twice.
Lonely Rich Kid: His backstory in a nutshell. And the only real thing that has changed since then is his age.
Manchild: Pierce has a great list of immaturities and insecurities bordering on Psychopathic Man Child.
Manipulative Bastard: Best shown in "Intermediate Documentary Filmmaking", where he makes the rest of the group paranoid for ostracizing him.
The Millstone: Especially in Season 2. He discovers Jeff and Troy's "secret trampoline" and manages to expose it in a matter of minutes, getting it removed from campus, and breaking both his legs in the process. His ego leads him to go off-script during an anti-drug PSA, getting a room full of middle-schoolers excited for drugs (until Chang fixes it simply by taking his place). The rest of the group is occasionally Genre Savvy about this, not inviting him to a Dungeons & Dragons game / suicide intervention due to his insensitive manner (and they are proven right when he crashes the game and nearly short-circuits the whole thing). During one of the paintball episodes, Jeff exploits this in order to use Pierce as a decoy:
Jeff: Hey Pierce, don't come over here, okay?
Pierce: Screw you! I'm comin' over there! [gets shot]
Mirror Character: Despite their obvious disdain for him, Pierce arguably has this going on with all the other members of the study group even if they don't want to acknowledge it:
It's most prominent with Jeff, as it's often suggested that Pierce is essentially what an older version of Jeff will look like if Jeff doesn't improve his ways;
Like Britta, Pierce often takes over-the-top offense at quasi-imagined slights and has some questionable political views (and understanding);
He shares Abed's social ineptness and tendency to say whatever's on his mind regardless of who it might offend;
He's intensely over-competitive and determined to win whatever the cost (even if it risks ruining his relationships with the people around him), like Annie. They also share a history of substance abuse;
Shirley is often offended by his ignorance, intolerance, and bigotry, but she can often be just as ignorant, intolerant, and even bigoted;
Like Troy, he's immature, a bit egotistical, and not very intelligent.
Misplaced Retribution: He takes out his frustrations of being excluded on Neil in "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons", even when Jeff and Abed tell him this is a suicide intervention without Neil's knowledge.
Mistaken for Racist: Despite his obvious lack of sensitivity, there are times when he genuinely doesn't intend to be offensive.
Never My Fault: Pierce lives and breathes this trope. His comments and actions aren't offensive, it's everyone else who needs to learn to take a joke. His over-the-top revenge schemes are no less than what others deserve for not giving him the enormous amounts of respect that are clearly his due. He usually gets away with it, too.
Not Helping Your Case: When he tries to dramatically say the group excluded him in "Advanced Dungeons and Dragons," they explain they're doing a fantasy RPG. He then calls it gay and stupid before berating them further.
The Obi-Wannabe: Fortunately, it's pretty obvious to the rest of the study group from the beginning. His cameo in the Season 5 opener plays with this, when Jeff encounters what initially appears to be Pierce's spirit telling him, "Looks as if you've lost your way"... but it just turns out to be a hologram directing students to the on-campus "Pierce Hawthorne Museum of Gender Sensitivity and Sexual Potency". Even then, his words about Greendale give Jeff his Heel Realization. The Season 6 opener has Abed invoke Maybe Magic, Maybe Mundane, since nobody else has ever seen the hologram or the museum.
Odd Friendship: Pierce and... anyone, really.
Out of Focus: Receives less and less focus as time goes on.
Pet the Dog: As befitting him being a Jerk with a Heart of Gold, Pierce is in fact capable of true acts of kindness every once in a while. Standout examples include:
"Intermediate Documentary Filmmaking": The tiara he gives Annie was not a mind game, but in fact a genuine gift on his part because she's his favorite of the group.
"Digital Estate Planning": He thanks the group for helping him beat his father at his own game and later encourages Gilbert to do the same. Pierce then happily embraces Gilbert as the brother he's always wanted.
"Herstory of Dance": He arranges for Sophie B. Hawkins to make an appearance at Britta's dance, as he was sick of how Jeff was treating her and admired how she didn't give up, even in the face of absolute failure.
"Cooperative Polygraphy": He leaves genuine gifts and some very kind words for Britta, Shirley, Annie, and Troy, showing that he did in fact care for and respect them. Double Subverted with Jeff, who received a gift but rather than a compliment only got one last gay accusation, though it can also be interpreted as Pierce instead viewing their relationship as Vitriolic Best Buds. Subverted with Abed, who is only insulted and given nothing but obligatory sperm.
Phrase Catcher: "Uh oh." Said by a member of the study group whenever Pierce appears to be demonstrating a dangerous level of senility.
Politically Incorrect Hero: In so much as Pierce can be considered a hero, anyway. He's racist, sexist, and homophobic, but Innocently Insensitive for the most part.
Punny Name: He easily gets on everyone's nerves, piercing through their patience/tolerance.
Punny Name: He's prickly.
Put on a Bus: Graduates with Jeff at the end of Season 4. Season 5 reveals that he's banned from Greendale. He dies off-screen that same season.
Racist Grandpa: Naturally. Although unlike his father, who is actively malicious in his racism, Pierce just doesn't know better.
Screw Politeness, I'm a Senior!: He is elderly and not a very nice man, shall we say.
Senior Sleep-Cycle: In "Competitive Ecology".
Serial Spouse: He's been divorced seven times.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: In the study room, Pierce and Jeff tend to butt heads the most, deconstructed in Season 2.
Sitcom Character Archetypes: Flip-flops back and forth between The Bully and The Sage. As an old man, he holds some politically incorrect views, and often throws fits or is transparently manipulative in order to get his own way. For example, in one episode he pretends to be dying and divides up the study group with final bequeathals to get back at them for ignoring him in previous episodes. On the flip side, he likes to view himself as a mentor to the study group, and often has quiet moments where he dispenses wisdom, particularly to Annie and Jeff.
Snark Ball: He doesn't get as many zingers in as Jeff or Britta but when he does, it's golden:
Jeff: There is no "Jeff and Britta"!
Pierce: He said, fully erect.
Token Evil Teammate: Easily the biggest Jerkass of the seven. Pierce is spiteful, petty, immature, and insensitive, and has occasionally played the role of a villain within the group.
Took a Level in Jerkass: In Season 2, he starts engaging in self-alienating behavior while simultaneously castigating the others for alienating him; this culminates in the events of "Intermediate Documentary Filmmaking," "A Fistful of Paintballs," and "For a Few Paintballs More."
Took a Level in Kindness: He loses much of his malicious edge in Season 3 upon some self-reflection, and returns back to the bumbling senior he used to be in Season 1. While he still has his moments of jerkassery, they're more out of insensitivity or a need to be acknowledged rather than nastiness. Conversely, he's also a lot nicer to the other members of the Study Group, most notably in his interactions with Shirley over their mutual desire to open a sandwich shop.
Totally Radical: His attempt to coin the phrase "streets ahead".
Troubled Sympathetic Bigot: Can come across as this. Pierce's inappropriateness, overzealous creativity, and pathological need to be accepted at all costs are all rooted in frustrations getting attention from his father and his fear that his age is now isolating himself from the rest of the study group.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: Especially in Seasons 2 and 4.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: Revealed as one in "Celebrity Pharmacology."
Yuri Fan:
He thinks Girl-on-Girl is Hot. And he did have that oddly supportive letter for Britta after she "came out" for "dating a lesbian".
Played with, as despite his tendency toward perversion, in "Advanced Gay", he says that he hates lesbians.