Abusive Parents: Averted. He's the only one of the four whose parents weren't toxic and/or destructive. However, his helping them stay together is part of what made him so certain that everything had an answer if you spent enough time to find it. Amusingly, they were also the source of his first stomach ache, when they asked him as a baby if he liked his name.
Adorably Precocious Child: Flashbacks to his childhood reveal him to have been very precocious and a professor in the making, already pondering existential questions at a young age.
Amnesiac Resonance: In Season 4, unlike any of the other times that he was in the fake neighborhood, Chidi can sense that he is being tortured. It's unclear if him seeing the Time-Knife in season 3 had anything to do with this, or that he was so happy before.
Badass Bookworm:
When Michael set up the scenario for Chidi to teach Eleanor ethics, he didn't expect for the man to succeed. What's more, he would later do the same with Michael, and it was his idea to recreate the experiment to see if people can change after death. When Eleanor wakes him up and restores his memories, it's also his idea to reform the afterlife by testing them with scenarios that force them to grow as people, using the Bad Place demons.
In a more literal sense, he's shockingly buff for an academic (he works out to deal with anxiety) and when actually provoked to throw a punch at Brent, he floors him instantly and knocks him through a table.
Bad Liar: Refuses to tell lies if at all possible, and even considering telling one for an ethical reason twists him up in knots. As a result, he's terrible at it.
Beware the Nice Ones: When Michael messed with Chidi by reenacting the Trolley Problem, Chidi got so mad that he kicked Michael out and threatened his ability to become good enough to enter the Good Place. It comes to a head when he punches out Brent in Season 4 for calling Simone a "bench" and shoving him.
Black and Nerdy: A moral philosophy professor from Senegal who is neurotic, bookish, not good with confrontation, and considers rowing out to the middle of a lake while reading French poetry to be his idea of a good time in paradise.
Book Smart: With his vast knowledge of ethics and philosophy, he's the most well-educated of the main characters.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: For all his flaws, Chidi is a rocking awesome ethics professor. He manages to reform Eleanor in several hundred reboots in teaching her to be a good person, and it wasn't just because she fell in love with him during several of those; much later, he succeeds in reforming Michael, who is a demon, from someone who is an Affably Evil sadist into a literal Noble Demon that breaks the rules to save his friends' souls. As we see on Earth, his students like him and highly respect him.
Butt-Monkey: Bad things often happen to him for the sake of comedy. Just as an example, during the long montage of Neighborhood reboots in "Dance Dance Resolution", two of Eleanor's Eureka Moments regarding the Bad Place feature in the background Chidi getting frightened by an angry pig while at a farm and getting chased across a field by a Scary Stinging Swarm of bees.
Catchphrase:
"I have / am getting a stomach ache."
"I am vexed, [addressee]! Vexed!"
A drawn-out "what?"
In Season 4, whenever he's particularly pleased about something, his response is always a rather high-pitched and delighted "Oh!"
Character Development:
More than anyone else on the show, Chidi's development is of a "three steps forward, two steps back" type thanks to his indecisive nature. Time and again he tries to become more decisive, and he even has long stretches where he succeeds... but then, when one of his decisions turns out to be wrong or has negative consequences, he tends to lapse back into indecisiveness for fear that he'll make another wrong choice. His development comes to a head in the Season 3 finale, as he makes the decision to willingly give up memories in order to ensure the success of the experiment, a choice that is no doubt the most decisive decision he's made in his entire life.
In Season 4, he's becoming more attuned to Spotting the Thread in the neighborhood, which is remarkable considering he's the one who gave up his memories and confidence to save the experiment. What's more, while he may not stand up for himself, he will stand up for others. His begging John to not blow Jason's cover has an impact, as John doesn't want to hurt Chidi or Jason. He also gains the confidence to stand up to Brent against the latter's racism and eventually punches him out for insulting Simone and shoving him.
By "The Answer" he is notably more serene, finally understanding that some things in life just don't have answers.
Character Filibuster: Once had an online lecture on Kantian philosophy that lasted three hours.
Clark Kent Outfit: Chidi is a nerdy professor and dresses like one most of the time, but Eleanor mentions that he is "surprisingly jacked". This is confirmed in Season 3 when he rips off his shirt during a breakdown and is shown to be quite well-built, more than characters of his archetype in fiction usually are anyways. It's eventually explained that he exercises to cope with stress.
The Cloudcuckoolander Was Right: He thinks he ended up in the Bad Place because he drank almond milk. That's not the reason, but he's right about something so small putting enough evil in the world that it can damn a person for eternity.
Clueless Chick-Magnet: Amusingly enough, he has had several different women vying for him at some point in the story (Vicky was faking it as part of her act, though her fixation on torturing him definitely raised some eyebrows), and he doesn't usually realize it until they spell it out for him. Notable because this doesn't tend to happen to characters of his archetype.
The Cobbler's Children Have No Shoes: He's a great teacher of moral philosophy, but whenever he tries to apply the concepts he teaches to his own life, he just winds up confusing himself until he can't make up his mind about anything.
The Conscience: To Eleanor, since he is the one teaching her about ethics and how to be a better person. Eleanor even asks herself "What would Chidi do".
Consistent Clothing Style: Chidi dresses like an academic in formal shirts and slacks, sometimes paired with a vest.
Cool Teacher: He's very patient with his students, both in the afterlife and in the real world. As he points out, ethics is the only thing he's certain about because he's studied it for years. In fact, his students are genuinely worried when he seems to have a nervous breakdown and tells them to embrace nihilism.
Cordon Bleugh Chef: During his brief Heroic BSoD, Chidi cared so little, that he decides to make canned chili with candy and marshmallows in it. He seems to have normal tastes and cooking ability otherwise.
Cunning Linguist: Chidi speaks half a dozen languages in addition to his native French, including Latin, "just in case it comes back."
Death from Above: Chidi died when an air conditioner slipped from a windowsill and landed on his head.
Demoted to Extra: Downplayed. He's no longer the main character for most of Season 4 due to his memory being erased, putting him out of commission for helping the others run the neighborhood... And yet because the entire experiment hinges on him, he's effectively the most important character, just Out of Focus. Even then, he is still a major supporting character, along with the other three humans in the new neighborhood. When he regains his memories, he goes back to being a main character.
The Ditherer: Chidi is the "Too Many Trees" variant of this trope — that is, he can't see the forest for the trees, weighing all sides of an issue far too much. It quite often gets to the point that that he can't stop weighing the pros and cons of anything long enough to make an actual decision. It's also deconstructed, as this flaw is what got him sent to the Bad Place due to how miserable it made everyone around him.
Eleanor: Uh-oh, it's Chidi kryptonite: a choice between any two things.
He possesses an immense amount of knowledge, but it is all in constant conflict in his head, leading him to be unable to make even the simplest of decisions (such as choosing between a dry-erase board and marker or paper and pen).
His indecision is actually what killed him; he was hit by a falling AC unit while he was too busy making a decision, spending half an hour just trying to decide what bar he and his friend should get a drink at.
This is such a defining part of his character that Gen, the all-powerful judge, tests him by telling him to choose between two hats, a brown one and a grey one. He spends 82 minutes preoccupied with deciding which choice is the right one, failing because he didn't realize that neither one was the "right" one. The point was that it was a Secret Test of Character; the right answer, therefore, was that either one was right. Chidi just had to make a simple choice quickly.
Doorstopper: Chidi's life's work is a 3600-page monstrosity that attempted to encompass the entirety of human morality and ethics. Unfortunately, he contradicts himself so much that not even Michael, a near-omniscient supernatural being, can make sense of it.
Endearingly Dorky: Chidi is a shy and analytical bookworm who can be an awkward Nervous Wreck, especially once his indecisiveness comes to light. Doesn't stop him from being a Clueless Chick-Magnet. For example, Simone delightedly explains that he's so weird, and she likes it.
Establishing Character Moment: Not to us, but to the universe. Mere moments after he's born, he gets a stomachache after his parents ask him if he likes his name.
Exact Words: He wants to be unrelentingly honest, which causes problems when the team has to lie their way through a Bad Place event. While pretending to be a demon, he's asked about torture techniques, so he tells the truth: he was once assigned to torture a Dumb Blonde from Arizona, so he made her read books.
Expy: During the first season, he's basically a nicer version of Joseph Garcin from No Exit; Garcin feigns being an honest man mistakenly punished, and Chidi has no reason to believe, as a moral philosopher, that he would end up in the Bad Place. Both men are also cowardly French-speakers caught between the two women in their stories. After the events of the first season, though, he goes through Character Development and quickly evolves beyond his similarities to Garcin.
Fatal Flaw: Indecision. He's a nice guy, but his obsession with always doing the most ethical thing no matter what has ruined his life and poisoned his relationships with other people. He also spends so much time debating the rights and wrongs of a situation that he never makes any decisions, so he either lets the decision time out or he lets others decide for him, and even then he can't make it concrete. He missed his mother's back surgery because he was already committed to helping his landlord's nephew set up a new phone, and once obsessed over a little white lie he told three years ago that meant nothing to anyone but himself.
Chidi: Every friend, every girlfriend was driven mad because I couldn't do anything!
Gentleman and a Scholar: He's an incredibly intelligent and kind person, though his obsession with morality and resulting indecisiveness do a lot of harm.
Heel Realization: Chidi realizes how much almond milk... no, his obsession and indecisiveness over doing the right thing led to him hurting everyone in his life and got him sent to the Bad Place.
Heroes Love Dogs: He's shown to be fond of dogs on multiple occasions, and mentions having had one as a kid that he really loved. When trying to find the right way to break up with Simone, he seriously considers giving her a dog as he does so just to lighten the blow, and in a flashback, we see him unable to choose between two adorable puppies.
Heroic BSoD: In Season 3, after he learns about his death, time in the Bad Place, and resurrection - and discovers that this knowledge dooms him to the Bad Place again because of the moral deserts problem, he loses morale entirely and embraces nihilism for the rest of the day.
Honor Before Reason: To the point of being a Principles Zealot. His strong moral code and refusal to budge on that often leads him to either do stupid things or otherwise put something important at risk. In "Rhonda, Diana, Jake, and Trent", he has a very hard time lying to the demons who think he's one of them because he's very much against lying, even though he needs to or else he'll be condemned to eternal damnation.
Ignored Epiphany: When he was alive, pretty much everyone told him that his attitude was unhealthy and he occasionally showed signs of listening but always fell back into his old habits.
Innocently Insensitive: For Chidi, the road to the Bad Place was literally paved with good intentions. He cared about the people around him and only wanted to live a moral life, but his tendency to overthink and obsess about taking the right path led to him being so indecisive that he hurt everyone around him.
Ironic Name: His given name means "God Lives". On one hand, it's fitting for a moral philosophy professor that finds out that the afterlife is real. However, in a show about what happens to you after you die, God is surprisingly non-existent as a character. In fact, it's implied in-universe that there is no God, or at least not as understood in modern Abrahamic religions, or any other religion for that matter (the closest thing so far would be Gen, referred to only as "The Judge"). And in Season 3, when a resurrected Team Cockroach accidentally finds out about the afterlife and is automatically disqualified from their last shot at getting into the Good Place, Chidi, taking it the worst out of everyone, ends up reciting everyone's favorite Nietzsche quote:
Dealer: Hey, do you wanna talk to God?
Chidi: [emotionless] God is dead. God remains dead. And we have killed him. Who will wipe this blood off us? What festivals of atonement, what sacred games shall we have to invent? (Friedrich Nietzsche, 1882.)
Dealer: [visibly freaked out] ...I was just try'na sell you some drugs, and you made it weird! (runs off)
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: Chidi is a variation. While he knows a lot about morality and ethics, he is unable to present a concise, decisive view of his knowledge, having learned so much that he can't keep his thoughts straight. His 3,600-page book is a total mess where Chidi repeats himself, goes off on tangents, and quite often contradicts what he just said. Chidi is naturally thrown to realize his life's work is worthless.
Love at First Sight: He and Eleanor tend to click on seeing each other in a fair portion of reboots. In Reboot 1, Chidi was attracted to her before hearing her story. Eleanor only realizes she fell in love with him for real after he saves her from going to the Bad Place. On Earth, Eleanor becomes besotted with him after seeing a video of his lecture but doesn't feel vulnerable enough to express it especially since he was interested in Simone.
Meaningful Name:
"Chidi" is one of the names that can mean "God Lives" in Igbo, a language spoken in Nigeria, where Chidi was born before he moved to Senegal. This is even directly stated in the show by Kamilah. It's quite fitting for a show set in the afterlife. Furthermore, Eleanor had no real exposure to the concept of a person living a life focused on trying to do what was good, with Chidi introducing her to it (and, in a sense, bringing her closer to God).
"Anagonye" comes from three separate Igbo words that combine to mean "to build from the ground up," which Chidi does by giving Eleanor and later all of Team Cockroach entry-level ethics lessons to help improve their (mostly) non-existent morals. Also, though pronounced differently, it has the word "agony" in it, which handily describes his Secret-Keeper situation and status as a Butt-Monkey.
Morality Chain: He also functions as one of these to Team Cockroach, constantly analyzing their actions to help them make the best decision.
Morality Pet: He helps Eleanor change for the better no matter the circumstance. Eleanor, who will otherwise insult him and other people, keeps emphasizing that Chidi is a good person and he deserves better than what he got. Exaggerated when he gets Michael, a literal demon, to pull a Heel–Face Turn through his ethics lessons.
Mr. Fanservice: Very rarely the case due to his personality, but apparent when he takes off his shirt, due to his rather impressive figure underneath.
Nerd Glasses: Thick black rectangular ones, just to mark that he's the resident professor. Also possibly counts as Purely Aesthetic Glasses, since he can't possibly be in need of them in the afterlife.
Nerds Are Sexy: Played with. Chidi is extremely ripped, but also a shy philosophy professor. According to Eleanor, this is because he once learned exercise helped with anxiety and then never stopped doing it.
Nervous Wreck: Doing anything immoral, no matter how slight, turns Chidi into a wreck. He obsessed over a white lie he told his coworker for three years.
Nice Guy: Like many of those in the Good Place, Chidi is kind and morally upstanding. Though initially conflicted about whether or not he should help Eleanor stay, he decides to go through with it even though it puts him in extreme danger as well. Michael even notes that he was the closest of the main four to get into the real Good Place. Not actually close, but closer than the other three.
Non-Action Guy: Despite being "surprisingly jacked", he's not good at physical fighting. In the fight scene in "Don't Let the Good Life Pass You By", he spends his time getting dragged around, while the others get hits on the demons.
No-Respect Guy: Downplayed. The remainder of the Soul Squad (especially Eleanor and Michael) make fun of him due to his profession and indecisiveness. Besides that, he is considered the most valuable member of the team due to his intelligence and kindness.
No Sense of Direction: He claims to have what doctors call "directional insanity". Apparently he once got lost on an escalator.
Not So Above It All: In the new experiment in "Pandemonium," he giggles with Eleanor about kissing her in view of the test subjects since it's like he's dating his boss. He also says he wants to get horny with her while she says she wants to talk about philosophy.
Obliviously Evil: In life, Chidi really tried to be a good person, but as Michael pointed out, his rigidity and indecisiveness made everyone around him suffer.
Odd Friendship: He and Jason couldn't be more different but they get along quite well and Jason even imparts some genuinely good advice to Chidi on occasion.
Official Couple: With Eleanor, as demonstrated in Season 3. (And Michael made them soulmates.)
One True Love: No matter what Michael did, no matter what ridiculous permutations or scenarios he set up, Eleanor always found Chidi, always asked him for help, and he always helped her.
There is no answer. But Eleanor is the answer.
OOC Is Serious Business:
During his nervous breakdown in "Jeremy Bearimy", Chidi started acting like Eleanor. He put on a shirt without paying for it at a grocery store, bought a bunch of junk food, and then ranted to his students about how nothing matters and they should embrace nihilism and do what they want, and no exam since he's just going to eat candy chili. He only snaps out of it when Eleanor, in full Hourglass Plot, convinces him they should do good anyway since it does matter.
He says that his college thesis was his life's work and everything he wanted to accomplish. Chidi is actually happy in Season 3 when the university fires him for having a nervous breakdown in front of the students.
Opposites Attract: Chidi comes to realize that he's in love with Eleanor, who is a scatterbrained and amoral underachiever.
Out of Focus: For half of Season 4, ironically for the same reasons as why he was so central a character of the other seasons.
Phrase Catcher: "This is why everyone hates moral philosophy professors" has been thrown his way more than once.
Poke the Poodle:
His idea of being rebellious as a child was sneaking into his parents' study and reading the unabridged dictionary. Eleanor is dumbfounded that not only was that the worst he ever did as a kid, but he's also quietly proud of it.
On a similar note, at one point while disguised as a demon, he's pressed to come up with an especially bad torment. After he gets over his aversion to lying, he tells them to... force them to read books.
Properly Paranoid: Not that it helped him, but it turns out in Season 3 that his ethical paranoia over even the seemingly smallest actions (like drinking almond milk) was not unjustified.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Blue Oni to Jason and Eleanor's Red Oni. They are headstrong, impulsive, and, especially before Character Development, very hedonistic, while Chidi is a levelheaded, cautious, and intellectual type and much more hesitant and thoughtful about his actions (to the point of paralyzing indecisiveness).
Right for the Wrong Reasons: A Running Gag is that whenever Chidi discovers that he is in the Bad Place, he thinks it is because he drank almond milk in-spite of how detrimental growing almonds is to the environment. In Season 3, it is revealed that long-term consequences for seemingly innocuous actions in a world as complex as 21st-century Earth have caused everyone who had died in the last 521 years to go to the Bad Place. So technically, Chidi did go to the Bad Place for drinking almond milk (among other things).
Running Gag: During Seasons 1 and 2, whenever Chidi learns that he's in the Bad Place, he thinks that it's because he drank almond milk despite knowing about its negative environmental impacts.
Secret-Keeper: He's the first person Eleanor confesses to that she's not the person everyone else thinks she is. Since she made him promise not to betray her, he can't tell anyone else, so he tries to help her learn how to be a good person worthy of staying in the Good Place.
Secret Test of Character: He was given this by the Judge, to pick a hat out of a bunch of hats, and failed. The Judge explains that he didn't get the wrong hat, it just took him 40 minutes to pick one, which is a sign of his indecisiveness (though the Judge notes that she doesn't care about hats).
Seen It All: Literally, when he got all of his memories and reboots restored, including seeing the Time Knife. The two challenges that come closest to breaking Chidi's mind, "Jeremy Bearimy" and the Time Knife, no longer affect him, to the point that by the finale, he makes a calendar out of the former, and gives a No-Sell to the latter.
Shirtless Scene: Gets shirtless in "Jeremy Bearimy" after embracing nihilism.
Skewed Priorities: His inability to make a decision sometimes leads him to prioritize the trivial over the important. Just as an example, he missed his mother's back surgery because he was already committed to helping his landlord's nephew set up a new phone.
Smart People Wear Glasses: He's a skilled teacher of moral philosophy, and he's worn glasses since he was a young boy.
Spanner in the Works: No one expected Chidi to be as good of a teacher as he turns out to be. Eleanor genuinely turns over a new leaf and consequently completely screws up Michael's evil plan and forces him to bring in Shawn to try and salvage the situation.
The Spock: Of a sort. When he was alive, Chidi was obsessed with finding the most moral solution to every issue, even his romantic relationships, and believed everything else was secondary, even his own happiness.
Straw Nihilist: Played for Laughs in "Jeremy Bearimy". Chidi starts talking like this after he has a breakdown due to having learned about the afterlife. This includes quoting Friedrich Nietzsche's "God is dead" speech, and telling all his students to become nihilists.
Straw Vulcan: Chidi's entire personality was born from the (false) assumption that everything can be explained through careful research, consistently weighing options and finding the objective truth with no heart to give it direction. This has made him a ditherer who could not make an easy decision no matter how simple or inconsequential for fear of making the wrong decision and the potential consequences of that failure.
Stylistic Suck: His attempt at writing his own philosophy book ended up as a 3600 page mess that was nearly indecipherable due to his inability to commit to any ideas and his attempts to be as logical and objective as possible.
Throw the Dog a Bone: As of "You've Changed, Man" it's revealed that his point total did increase during the new experiment, and the Soul Squad trusts him enough to come up with a viable solution to reforming the afterlife. Which he does, with aplomb!
Token Good Teammate: He's the most unambiguously nice of the main four, has no corrupt and selfish motives, and his indecision was rooted in good intentions; Michael even notes that Chidi was the closest to getting to the Good Place out of the original four humans (granted, not even remotely close enough to actually gain entry, but still, relatively close). On the other hand, Chidi saw what his obsessive indecisiveness did to the people around him yet made no effort to change.
Tomato in the Mirror: Like Tahani. By the standards of the Celestial Bureaucracy, he's a bad person, and therefore in the Bad Place. He had accepted the idea that they were in the Good Place because it validated his concept of himself as a good person.
Trademark Favorite Food: Consistently shown to really like almond milk, even though he knows how bad it is for the environment.
Troubling Unchildlike Behavior: When picking teams for schoolyard games, he takes things like favoritism, gender politics, and privilege into account. Although his childhood behavior is mostly Played for Laughs, it takes a much more dramatic turn when we learn of the event that caused Chidi to become so obsessed with finding "the right answer" to every problem - Chidi overheard his parents arguing & strongly hinting at a divorce when he was eight, and stayed up all night writing an hour long academic lecture on the reasons why they should stay together. This actually worked & his parents remained together, but it also had the unintended consequence of convincing the young Chidi that every problem has a "correct" solution, that he had a duty to find those solutions, and that the consequences for choosing incorrectly could be grave. Eleanor is the first person that we see actually point out the sad undercurrent of this story.
Understanding Boyfriend: He's this with Eleanor after they actually fall for each other. A shining example is when she has a breakdown because their relationship seems too perfect, and he sits by her and gently assures her not to worry about the future too much.
Unrequited Love Switcheroo: Normally in a reboot, Eleanor is in love with him, and he can't decide if he wants to be with her. In one, shortly before Eleanor realized her soulmate's bad song was torture and "THIS is the Bad Place!" yet again, Chidi was upset when Eleanor left ethics class earlier to attend said soulmate's performance.
Will Not Tell a Lie: He wants to be unrelentingly honest because it's the ethical thing to do, which causes problems when the team has to lie their way through a Bad Place event. This also comes up when his former college professor buys bright red boots. Chidi is unable to hold back his honesty and calls the boots ugly right to his professors face making the professor quite upset.
Yank the Dog's Chain: In at least one reboot and in the alternate timeline, he and Eleanor became a serious couple, and Eleanor admitted that she loved him. Michael undid the first relationship while taunting Eleanor and Chidi that their love wasn't real because he orchestrated it, and in the second Chidi willingly sacrifices his memories so that his previous relationship with Simone won't affect the experiment involving her soul in the fake neighborhood.
You Are Worth Hell: He told Michael in the pet reboot that it didn't matter how they were tortured, because he and Eleanor are soulmates. In Season 3, he comforts Eleanor about the uncertainty of their future together by telling her she is worth it wherever they are, and Jeremy Bearimy means they have all of eternity to fall in love again.