Achilles' Heel: She is rendered powerless and disoriented if magnetic handcuffs are placed on her. She also has a manual outlining a large number of secondary functions and use of a paperclip in her left ear can turn her into a marble, helpless until restored.
Action Girlnote : Beats up Shawn and throws him into a wall to help Michael escape from the Bad Place. Even when she's depowered on Earth she can still take out half a dozen demons by herself, and then she gets her powers back and starts telekinetically throwing them across the room.
Affectionate Nickname:
Jason calls her "not-a-girl" often.
He also still calls her "girl", with the expectation that she'll respond "Not a girl." It started out as him not understanding that Janet wasn't a girl and her genuinely correcting him, but the exchange has now morphed into an inside joke between them.
A.I. Is a Crapshoot:
Played for laughs. She gets rather glitchy after she's rebooted.
Later when she helps Jason and Tahani as relationship therapist, since she subconsciously remembers being married to Jason and she glitches whenever she attempts to lie about being happy. Then promptly subverted when she willingly offers herself up to be turned off and replaced before her lie glitches hurt people.
Ain't Too Proud to Beg: Parodied. She's programmed to desperately beg for her life if anyone tries to press her kill switch. As soon as someone balks, she immediately calms down and reassures them that she feels no pain and doesn't care about her life.
Alien Catnip: Magnets cause her to act drunk. She even gets a hangover afterward.
Anthropomorphic Personification: She (and every other kind of Janet) is often described as an "anthropomorphized vessel" of all the knowledge in the universe.
Badass in Distress: She's kidnapped for a couple episodes in Season 4, rendered powerless by a magnet jail.
Bad "Bad Acting": In "Rhonda, Diana, Jake, and Trent," Janet has to pretend to be a Bad Janet when the gang is breaking into the Bad Place. She finds it difficult to refuse a direct request, let alone insult them while she's doing it.
Tahani: I'm going to make a simple request, and you're going to give me that patented Bad Janet attitude. Can I have a glass of water?
Janet: (chimes and produces a glass of water; cheerfully) Here you go.
Tahani: (hands the glass to Michael) No. Let's try again. Be mean. Bad Janet, can I have a glass of water?
Janet: (strained) No. I would never give you that, you...dumb...person.
Tahani: Janet, what's that behind your back?
Janet: Nothing.
Tahani: Give it to me.
Janet: (apologetic) It's a glass of water. (Michael sighs) And a backup glass.
Bad Liar: When her reset button is approached, her programming forces her to beg for her life, frequently with a ridiculous excuse made up on the spot.
Janet: Michael, I'm pregnant, and it's your baby!
Janet: Michael, Michael, if I'm gone, who will take care of my birds?
Janet: Michael, I have tickets to Hamilton next week, and there's a rumor that Daveed Diggs is coming back!
Benevolent A.I.: A being with most, if not all the knowledge of the universe, Janet just wants to be as helpful as possible.
Beware the Nice Ones: When Trevor tries interfering with the humans, Janet tries summoning various items to see if they can injure and/or kill him. Only the fact she lacks her powers prevents anything happening. Later on, Shawn attempts to kidnap the humans, and Janet promptly fights off a bar full of demons in hand-to-hand combat to stop him. She even interrupts Shawn and Michael's pre-fight banter with a "Screw this! Let's fight!" and karate-chopping Shawn in the neck.
Big Red Button: In order to reboot her, one must push a big red button on an isolated beach.
Birds of a Feather: She started out feeling no emotions but programed to say everything in a cheerful voice, making her vacantly cheerful in a way that complimented Jason's naïve optimism.
Bizarre Alien Biology: Not an alien. Janets are sexless, genderless, human-shaped vessels of knowledge. They can summon anything they imagine or are asked for into existence, have a body temperature measured upward of several million degrees, don't experience the passage of time but do use it as a lotion for their skin, don't need to eat, get drunk near magnets, and aren't supposed to have blood (having blood is a sign a Janet is glitching). Also, shining a light in one ear causes it to come out the other refracted.
Blessed with Suck: At the beginning of Season 1, Janet was more roboticnote , acting on the default settings of Janet programming by only following orders and her failure to express any emotion or individual thought that wasn't blind optimism. After more than 800 reboots, she starts displaying a more complex, human-like personality, which also includes more negative human qualities like a capacity to lie, feel anger, sadness, jealousy and existential ennui. Since Good Janets aren't made to feel such emotions, this has caused a modicum of problems, including causing earthquakes and other mishaps whenever she lies (even when she doesn't know it), creating the unpredictable Derek who jeopardizes Michael's truce with the humans and frustrations with trying to keep the Neighborhood Experiment going in Season 4.
Brought Down to Badass: Being on Earth negates her powers, but she still has complete knowledge of (and seemingly perfect memory of) the entire universe up to the point she entered Earth, which she's able to use to put together incredibly advanced sci-fi devices. She also retains all her knowledge of how to fight, allowing her to easily beat up a room full of angry demons.
Brought Down to Normal: Along with Michael, being on Earth removes her powers. She's still insanely smart and apparently still has the capacity to remember everything she learns, but she can't just instantly absorb new knowledge anymore, nor can she summon things... much to her frustration. Like Michael, it's unclear if it made her effectively mortal, though.
Brutal Honesty: When Michael announces he's leaving the Good Place, Janet bluntly says it will not affect her in any way. Which is true, since she's an anthropomorphized construct with no real emotions.
Buxom Beauty Standard: She has a sizeable chest, to the point Eleanor nicknames her "busty Alexa" and notes her "rockin' bod".
Came Back Wrong: Every reboot she goes through adds another layer to her programming. In one reboot, she somehow bonded with Jason in a way no one could have anticipated and the two of them end up getting married. Michael finds this development to be so abhorrent that he decides to go reboot Janet again to try and fix things. And as of "The Trolley Problem", she's accidentally developed the ability to willfully lie (due to being rebooted 802 times) which causes potentially-catastrophic glitches throughout the neighborhood as lying fundamentally goes against her programming.
Catchphrase:
"Janet?" (boop) "Hi there!"
"Not a X", "X" referring to whatever humanly-relatable thing characters assume her to be, most commonly a girl or robot. The lack of this catchphrase when Jason called her a girl in Season 4 is a major hint that she had been replaced by a Bad Janet.
Character Tics: When not doing anything, Janet always keeps her hands clasped in front of her.
Cloud Cuckoo Lander: Even though she knows everything, that doesn't necessarily mean she truly understands everything. So she can sometimes come off as this, especially in the earlier seasons where she hadn't yet developed emotion.
Covert Pervert: Not quite, as she's too innocent to really qualify, but in season three she tries to make a stop on the mission to buy Jason some booty shorts. She also engineers a simulation that allows her to spend time with him in a sauna (while he's wearing a strongman suit).
The Cutie: Always friendly and glad to help. Every time she is updated, which is compared to a birthday, she likes to take a piece of birthday cake and smash it around where her mouth is.
Damsel in Distress: Not a damsel, on account of being not a girl, but "Tinker, Tailor, Demon, Spy" reveals that she's been kidnapped by the Bad Place while a Bad Janet has been pretending to be her to sabotage the experiment. The episode ends with Michael and Jason leaving the neighborhood to rescue her.
Death Is Cheap:
Though she is accidentally "killed" by Chidi when he presses her deactivation button, she comes back to life a few hours later as an updated version. Though as Eleanor, and Janet herself points out she is an anthropomorphic construction of information who wasn't born to begin with so therefore she can't technically die.
In "Dance Dance Resolution", each neighborhood reset requires Michael to reboot Janet, thus resulting in (at least) 801 more iterations of this trope.
Janet's manual reveals that a so-called permanent death would involve turning her into a marble. Michael finds that he can't do it when Janet tells him to so that the neighborhood stops glitching. We learn that marbleized Janets can be revived but they are conscious as marbles.
Dissonant Serenity: She always speaks in a friendly, upbeat tone, even when giving bad news or noting unpleasant facts.
A Dog Named "Dog": Like all Janets, she is called "Janet."
Face Death with Despair: Played for Laughs; Janet is programmed to plead for her life when someone threatens to push her kill switch. When we see this in action, she follows the pleading with something to the effect of "Just kidding".
First Guy Wins: Jason was the first person who was nice to her after she rebooted, and they get married in Season 1. Season 3 reveals that Janet is still in love with him and has been all this time, though she doesn't remember it.
A Form You Are Comfortable With: She's the neighborhood's interface with the celestial mainframe. That said, she's not entirely a non-sentient construct in human form in the sense that she does have some sense of 'selfness' and even emotion at times, same as a sentient being.
Goofy Malfunctioning Robotnote : Janet feeling new emotions, being rebooted, or operating outside her normal programming can cause her to malfunction and act silly.
In "Most Improved Player", after Chidi accidentally rebooted her, she starts creating cactuses instead of the things people ask her for and playing with a plant in Michael's office while going, "Wheeeee!"
In "Janet and Michael", she starts doing things like spewing pennies out of her mouth or making a giant sub sandwich drop from the ceiling. The problem is that she's sad because Jason was in love with her in the first reboot, but after many reboots, Jason doesn't remember and now is in a relationship with Tahani. That is making Janet sad, and she tries to lie about how it makes her feel, since her directive is to make the humans happy. But Janets, by their nature, aren't supposed to have emotions or be able to lie, so it's causing a Reality-Breaking Paradox.
Great Big Book of Everything: She can access information about everything in the universe.
Grew Beyond Their Programming: Each reboot results in an update to her processing power and capabilities, she ponders that she might be the most advanced of her kind to ever exist after it's happened more than 800 times, and indeed comes off as far more human-like by mid season two. The biggest change is that she is now able to feel emotions, develop genuine attachments and affection for others while also displaying empathy and intuition. She even figures out a Loophole Abuse in her own programming, at several points pulls off strategies that should not have been possible like creating Derek or pulling humans into her void.
Hammerspace: She either has access to one or is at least partially made of one, considering she pulls her user manual out of her nose and seems to be able to create objects out of thin air.
Have You Tried Rebooting?: If Janet glitches, or needs to be taken offline for a while, you can simply turn her off and back on again. It then takes her a few days for her to fully reboot.
Humanity Is Infectious: Janet acts much less roboticnote  as the series progresses, as a superfluous amount of reboots gave her the ability to connect to humans in ways a Janet has never connected to a human before. In the season three finale, she even states that each reboot made her feel more human, which subsequently made everything make less sense.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: At first to Michael, then to Team Cockroach. Janet can do basically anything. But this gets played with in Seasons 3 and 4 when the pressures of having to do everything and being everyone's sidekick starts to get to her.
Insistent Terminology: Whenever someone refers to her as virtually anything, she'll quickly counter that she's not one, such as a robot or a girl.
Interspecies Romance: She, a Janet, develops a romance with the human Jason, a human in the afterlife in multiple lives.
Irony: Though a Bad Janet cannot impersonate a Good Janet without melting, our Janet is able to impersonate a Bad Janet with ease. Though as Season 4 shows, that probably has to do with the multiple reboots beforehand.
Limited Wardrobe: The "variations of the same scheme" version. Her standard outfit is a vest, skirt and a patterned blouse which together look sort of like a flight attendant's uniform. Every time she's rebooted the color of the skirt and vest change along with the pattern of the blouse and the way she styles her hair. "Dance Dance Resolution" shows her in multiple variations of this outfit thanks to Michael constantly rebooting her. Other Good Janets have the same general look.
Logic Bomb:
Parodied. She is often compared to a robot, and becomes extremely confused that Chidi decided to come alone to the couples' spa, even saying "DOES NOT COMPUTE" over and over. Though she was just joking.
Janet: [in a robotic voice] DOES NOT COMPUTE! DOES NOT COMPUTE! [laughs] I'm just kidding. I mean it doesn't compute, but I'm not gonna explode or anything.
She does begin glitching when faced with a more complex internal contradiction when she gives Jason and Tahani couples' therapy. She is programmed to put the happiness of the residents first, but as she is also in love with Jason, she at the same time doesn't want to do this.
Loophole Abuse:
She can side with the humans and Michael when they team up, because she was made to make humans' lives easier and tend to their needs. Eleanor, Jason, Chidi and Tahani are the only real humans in the "Good Place", so she can help them instead of everyone else.
While she technically Cannot Tell a Lie, her primary directive is to ensure the happiness of the humans under her control. Since there are actually only four humans residing in the Neighborhood, she is allowed to deceive the non-humans if it helps the humans.
Meaningful Name: "Janet" comes from "Jeanette"/"Jeanne", which means "God is gracious." Makes sense for a being designed by the Good Place to be forever courteous and all-providing for those in the afterlife.
Mechanical Abomination: Of the "Android/Angelic" variety. While she insists that she isn't a robot, she in an anthropomorphized celestial entity that operates not unlike that of an interactive program like Siri and Alexa, with various quirks similar to how you input information and request not unlike a browser or a computer. She can be "activated" by pressing her nose for three-seconds, she can be logged on by entering a four-digit key on a key-pad conjured on her hand*, her marbleizing procedure is pressing her nose and inserting a paperclip behind her ear, she takes time to download all of the knowledge in the universe after she is "rebooted", there are many other Janets (including other Good Janets, Bad Janets, Neutral Janets and obsolete Disco Janets) that all run on the same network and they all maintain the existence of their respective neighborhoods.
Ms. Fanservice: She usually leans more towards pretty and modest, but Janet occasionally indulges in this via some of her outfits.
My Species Doth Protest Too Much: After an excessive amount of reboots, this Janet is able to do things previously thought to be impossible for a Janet, such as lying, expressing and experiencing emotions, and, under certain circumstances, the ability to refuse orders. When she meets up with another Good Janet in the penultimate episode, she's clearly off-put by their lack of autonomy and critical thinking.
Nice Girl: Not a girl, but semantics aside, Janet is extremely kind, bubbly, and always ready to help out, to the point that even trying to be rude is against her very nature.
No Biological Sex: Janet is confirmed to be sexless and genderless. She physically resembles a human woman, and answers to the pronouns "she" and "her", but will always politely chime in with "Not a girl!" if someone calls her one. Given that she's a physical manifestation of all the knowledge in the universe, and the body is probably to make things more convenient for the humans she helps, it makes sense that Janets don't really have or need genders.
Non-Human Non-Binary: Janet's species are infinite databases that, despite appearing as female and going by she/her pronouns, explicitly do not identify as women.
No Social Skills: Janet's very nice and polite, but tact is apparently not part of her programming, and she often drops some pretty harsh truth-bombs without any sort of attempt to take the edge off. While on Earth, she sees no problem with cheerfully informing a total stranger that the woman he thinks is his aunt is really his mother, leading Michael to quickly drag her away.
Offscreen Teleportation: Both in-universe and out-of-universe. She always appears and disappears via jump cut, usually appearing directly behind whoever called her.
The Omniscient: She's designed to know literally everything, right down to the smallest detail. A person cannot pick up a sandwich without Janet knowing about it instantly.
Only Friend: To Michael, after god-knows-how-long working together on their fake Good Place.
Opposites Attract: She, an infinite database who knows literally everything, falls in love with Jason, who may very well be the dumbest person to ever live.
Out-of-Character Alert: She's visibly more annoyed with Eleanor and Brent, and delivering more Brutal Honesty in Season 4. This is because it's not actually "our" Janet; it's a Bad Janet impersonating her.
Perpetual Smiler: Always has a smile on her face, which often crosses into Dissonant Serenity territory when she spouts horrific facts about the Bad Place (such as Columbus being there because of the raping, pillaging and genocide he committed) or when she tells Eleanor how she can be killed.
Physical God: Janet knows everything and can create anything at any time. Seemingly her only limitation is not being able to lie, though the latest version has found a way around that.
Pinocchio Nose: In Season 2, she becomes very sad that Jason and Tahani are together. She attempts to lie that she's happy for them, but every time she does, she malfunctions in strange ways like spewing pennies out of her mouth or causing a huge vegetarian sub sandwich to fall from the ceiling of Michael's office.
The Pollyanna: Janet is constantly cheery and optimistic, which, in Season 4, is one of the ways that they realize she's actually Bad Janet.
Reality Warper: Her powers involve being able to conjure almost anything into existence. Martial application of these powers make her (and other Janets) more dangerous than most anything else in this realm.
Resurrection Sickness: After being killed and subsequently rebooted, she spends a few days having to relearn all the knowledge of the universe. Initially she can only say her name and "hello", and spontaneously generates cacti.
Robot Girl: Subverted/defied. While she is like a walking, talking, infinitely more helpful version of intelligent personal assistant programs like Siri or Alexa (even lampshaded as Eleanor calls her "Busty Alexa" at one point), she's neither a robot nor a girl (rather, a genderless interface for the celestial mainframe). Jason or the other characters repeatedly refer to her as one and/or the other, and Janet always has to correct them. The one time she doesn't clues in Jason that she's an impostor.
Janet: Not a robot.(...) Not a girl.
Running Gag:
Interjecting to deny whatever label or emotion is ascribed to her in casual conversation.
Whenever Michael calls her name, she appears in the opposite direction that he's currently facing.
Saying Sound Effects Out Loud: When deprived of her powers of teleportation, she says the distinctive "bing" out loud because she's uncomfortable without it.
Shipper on Deck: Seems to approve of Chidi and Simone, having determined their hypothetical offspring would be incredibly attractive.
Janet: One of them is hot enough to be on The Bachelor, and smart enough not to go on The Bachelor!
Signature Sound Effect: Janet chimes whenever she appears, disappears, or summons an object.
Single-Target Sexuality: After marrying Jason Mendoza once, she retains this toward him through all subsequent reboots, even though neither of them remember it.
Spanner in the Works: Michael really doesn't understand how badly Janet's Good Place programming can interfere with his experiment. Because she prioritizes the desires of human residents above all else, she frequently acts to contradict Michael's intentions. This is most apparent in the second Neighborhood reboot, where Janet is directly responsible for how quickly the charade collapses:
Eleanor stuffed a letter to herself in her mouth, knowing Janet would deliver it to her post-reboot. She was right.
Janet brings Jason directly to Eleanor when he wants someone to talk to, precipitating her realization of the true nature of the experiment.
Statuesque Stunner: Janet has No Biological Sex, but looks like the 5'10 and beautiful D'Arcy Carden. Not to mention, no Janets are ever seen not wearing heels!
Stealth Hi/Bye: Whenever her name is called, she appears out of nowhere, usually behind the person who called them, in a bit of Bewitched-esque freeze-frame trickery. Even during The Oner in "Whenever You're Ready", they still manage to hide how Janet materializes out of thin air.
Stepford Smiler: Despite not remembering her romance with Jason, she's still subconsciously attracted to him and her conflicting feelings about seeing him with Tahani start having dire effects on the whole neighborhood.
Summon Magic: Janet can create any object from thin air, no matter how random, including a duffel bag full of cocaine, a baby elephant made of pure light that speaks true secrets of the universe, and a 14-ounce ostrich steak impaled on a giant novelty pencil that reads "Lordy, Lordy, I'm Over 40."
Super-Strength: She is capable of lifting and throwing Shawn across the room with a single hand.
Three Laws-Compliant: While she is not a robot, she still follows her own version of the Three Laws. She will try to preserve her own existence but this is trumped by her having to follow the instructions of the residents of the Neighborhood. However, her primary objective is to ensure the happiness of the humans under her care so she is allowed to deceive the non-humans running the Neighborhood.
Token Good Teammate: She is actually the only genuinely good part of Neighborhood 12358W, having been kidnapped by Michael from the real Good Place to sell the illusion that the residents are not in the Bad Place.
Trust Password: Although she isn't aware of it, saying "not a girl" to Jason is this for them. When she doesn't say it in Season 4, he realizes "she" (actually Bad Janet) is the mole.
What Is This Thing You Call "Love"?: Initially (before she gains sentience and emotions over the course of several hundred reboots) she is unable to reciprocate Jason's love for her. However, as she is programmed to make humans happy, she marries him anyway.
What Measure Is a Non-Human?: Often Played for Laughs when Janet "begs for her life" or something similar to the horror of the humans, but played straight throughout Season 3 as Janet realizes she's in love with Jason and bonds with the other humans.