Absurd Phobia: He's afraid of the film Ratatouille because he's scared by the concept of a rat crawling into his hair and forcing him to do stuff.
Achievement In Ignorance: During "Janets", Jason figures out how to use his temporary Janet powers with ease, while Eleanor has repeated problems with them.
Admiring the Abomination: During Season 4 when Glenn returns to tell the Soul Squad that Michael is actually Vicky in a Michael-suit, Eleanor tells Michael to remove his suit. He refuses because his true form is a gigantic fire squid and is worried that the humans will look at him differently, but Jason is all-too excited to see his true form.
Affably Evil: Not "evil" exactly, but he's a lot more outwardly friendly than his criminal past would suggest. He drops this characterization in season 3 after he joins the Brainy Bunch.
The All-Solving Hammer: He invariably suggests a Molotov cocktail as the solution to any situation the group faces. As he puts it, as soon as you use one, your problem gets replaced by a different problem.
Ambiguously Bi: Jason had multiple flings with Tahani, had no problem suggesting getting married to his male best friend, and eventually got into a lifelong relationship with the Non-Human Non-Binary femme-presenting Janet.
Ascended Meme: Jason and his friends are Florida Man. They are all incredibly stupid criminals who do every drug and never, ever realize how extreme they are.
Eleanor: Are you from Florida?
Jason: Jacksonville!
Asian Airhead: Jason is so very dumb. For starters, he thinks the Good Place might be an alien zoo or a highly elaborate prank show. Also mispronounces ethics as "ethnics." He only avoided giving himself away immediately by pretending to be silent, and as soon as he starts speaking again, he almost ruins his and Eleanor's chances of staying in the Good Place. He also thinks penguins aren't real.
Eleanor: [to Jason] Does your brain work, actually? Do you have a functioning head?
Atrocious Alias: His stage name was "DJ Mr. Music." DJ Music for short. He also tries going by "Jake Jortles" instead of "Blake Bortles" when it's already known that he's obsessed with Bortles and it might blow his cover.
Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: Jason has the attention span of a goldfish, which is not helped by his lack of intelligence. At one point, Eleanor gets him to stop hindering their discussion by having Janet give him a sparkler to play with.
The Baby of the Bunch: Played with. Although the humans on Team Cockroach are all around the same age, everyone is significantly nicer and more patient with Jason, mostly because he's basically a ten-year-old in a thirty-year-old's body. Notable examples include Michael ordering Janet to give him a Pikachu balloon to distract himself with, and Eleanor almost always calling him "bud," especially whenever she needs him to get serious (much like how one would talk with a child).
Berserk Button: Although Jason is normally too goofy and self-absorbed to get truly upset or angry, he does get very irritated when Tahani keeps calling him Jianyu long after he's stopped hiding his real identity.
Beware the Nice Ones: Eleanor acknowledges that he's the nicest of the Soul Squad in due part to being too stupid to be a jerk. But in Season 2 he was instrumental to helping them escape the museum with a Molotov Cocktail, and in Season 4 he figures out a Bad Janet replaced our Janet, slapping magnetic handcuffs on her before Michael could turn himself into goo. When Tahani is terrified for our Janet being in the Bad Place and being tortured, still alive but conscious, Jason gets a Kubrick Stare and gives a Badass Boast: he's going to go to the Bad Place, punch Shawn in the mouth, and rescue Janet. Then he and Michael pull it off!
Blue-and-Orange Morality: He sees no problem with committing robbery and other serious crimes, but he has an extremely strong moral objection to lying or pretending to be someone else, to the point that he still struggles with it even if it's the only way to avoid eternal damnation.
Book Dumb: Much is made of his lack of applicable knowledge and how it impacts his life (even being what ended it), but he's still gained a lot of life experience to be Street Smart and is capable of surprising intelligence on occasion.
Brainless Beauty: Jason is definitely not the brightest of people, but as Eleanor notes multiple times, he's pretty easy on the eyes. In fact, his combination of good looks and earnest innocence eventually gets him caught in the center of the show's first legitimate Love Triangle.
Calling Parents by Their Name: As part of their carefree Floridian nature, Jason refers to his dad by his name Donkey Doug. He tries calling him Donkey Dad during a father-son bonding moment but the two of them decide it doesn't sound as nice.
Calling Your Attacks: Played for Laughs. Yells out "BORTLES!" (referencing Jacksonville Jaguars quarterback Blake Bortles) when he throws a Molotov in both his flashback and in "Mindy St. Claire". Gets a Call-Back in "Rhonda, Diana, Jake, and Trent;" When posing as "Jake Jortles," he yells "JORTLES!"
Catchphrase: "Aw, dip", used in moments of realization. "The Ballad of Donkey Doug" suggests he got it, and "BORTLES", from Donkey Doug.
Celeb Crush: Apparently thinks Ariana Grande is the sexiest woman alive. He also wishes they were related.
Chaotic Stupid: Jason comes damn close to defining this alignment, having zero impulse control and a general inability to think of the consequences to his actions.
Character Development: It only really sticks in Season 3, but after his near-death experience, he becomes more introspective and empathetic towards others. He turns down a dance manager —Michael in disguise— because he wants to fix his life and find his purpose. Then he manages to assess that saving his father from damnation is impossible but he can still save his best friend. In Season 4, when trying to save his relationship with Janet after murdering Derek, Michael gives him a gentle lecture about not being so impulsive and reminding him why he got condemned the first time. Generally, throughout season 4 he shows a more empathetic and thoughtful side.
The Charmer: Jason is very charismatic. He led a sixty person dance crew solely through it and later has no issue charming both Janet and Tahani and even reaching Gen where others had failed. And unlike most examples, his charm is completely sincere.
Chekhov's Skill: Molotov Cocktail-making. Introduced in "Jason Mendoza", used to stall a room full of demons chasing Team Cockroach in "Rhonda, Diana, Jake, and Trent". Also used as a Failed Attempt at Drama at the end of "Mindy St. Claire".
Cloud Cuckoolander: As so aptly put by Mindy: "That guy has no idea what's going on."
Combat Pragmatist: When the going gets tough, Jason doesn't waste any time before starting to chuck pool balls at his opponents' heads. When rescuing Janet from the Bad Place, he made it a point to pack a not-lie detector that turns demons into goo, so as to make their escape easier.
Comically Missing the Point: Jason only has a vague idea of what's going on around him at any given point, frequently played for laughs. When the humans infiltrate the real Bad Place and come across some (very cover-blowing) animatronics of themselves, he's thrilled by the sight and seems indifferent to both the danger and the unflattering portrayal the animatronics present.
Consistent Clothing Style: Outside of his Buddhist Monk attire, he typically wears a windbreaker or track suit with a tank top underneath.
Crazy Jealous Guy: When they're creating the second neighborhood, Jason is very uncomfortable with Derek being around his girlfriend Janet.
Crazy-Prepared: When Michael bluntly told him that a Molotov Cocktail wouldn't work when infiltrating the Bad Place, Jason reveals he packed the not-lie detector to turn demons into goo.
The Cuckoolander Was Right: Though he's usually spouting nonsense, Jason has occasional moments where something he says becomes relevant later in the episode or season.
Culture Equals Costume:
He's a Buddhist monk, and thus wears their traditional robes around the Good Place. Justified (since they're not supposed to really have worldly possessions). Once the truth about him comes to light he starts dressing like a bro, although he does put on the robes when fooling the demons.
Filipino fans have noticed that one of his other main ensembles in the afterlife◊ looks heavily inspired by the barong Tagalog◊. Strangely, he gets to wear this even before he reveals he's actually of Filipino descent In-Universe and no one realizes the outfit belongs to another culture, although that may be a testament to his point that "Heaven is so racist".
Dance Enthusiast: Jason is passionate about dancing with his crew, and many of his anecdotes revolve around it.
Dark and Troubled Past: One which Jason is all too flippant about, though. Lampshaded when he facetiously mentions a depressing or horrifying thing from his past, and the camera pans to other people looking aghast, usually with an equally apt one-liner or two. For example, he very casually drops a reference to sexual abuse being perpetrated by teachers in a school he once attended during his wedding to Tahani. Not to mention, when he was young, he lost his mom to the big C... which was what they called the crocodile that lived by his house.note 
The Ditz: Jason is really carefree. After several weeks in the Good Place, he thinks they might have been abducted by aliens, he doesn't see why he should make an effort to avoid going to the Bad Place even after having it explained to him multiple times, and once he does understand, he assumes that Chidi's "ethnics" class works like regular school, complete with football and a prom. It's to the point that his Bad Place museum animatronic caricature literally only introduces himself and says "duhhhhhhhh", which real Jason thinks is hilarious.
Divine Date: Jason, an ordinary human being, falls in love with Janet, an anthropomorphized, omniscient, immortal vessel of all knowledge in the universe.
Dumbass Has a Point: Jason may be the dumbest human being on the planet, but even he can have flashes of brilliance every now and then.
In Chapter 13, when they're arguing about who should go to the Bad Place, Jason points out that he's the only one who hasn't been causing problems for anyone since they all came to the Good Place.
Jason also realizes he was right that this "Heaven" was really a prank show, and Eleanor even high-fives him on it.
In one of the many "reboots" of Neighborhood 12358W, it was Jason who figured out they are actually in the Bad Place. The idea that even Jason was able to outsmart him gave Michael heartburn out of sheer frustration.
Michael: Jason figured it out? Jason? This is a real low point. Yeah, this one hurts. Ow.
Every once in a while he comes up with a helpful insight, but these moments are buried deep within rambling stories about the things he got up to when he was still alive.
Jason: ...I framed one innocent gator dealer to save a 60-person dance crew.
Chidi: Shockingly, that is a relevant example of the Utilitarian dilemma. Well done.
In Season 3 Chapter 11, he manages to effectively explain to the Judge how difficult it can be for humans to make good decisions while also juggling the problems of normal life.
In the Season 4 premiere he is the first person to realize Eleanor is going too far in torturing Chidi.
A flashback in Season 4 shows that he gave Chidi advice about living in the moment, not agonizing over every decision, and making choices based on what he wants and feels. In another episode, he helps Chidi get over being an Insecure Love Interest for Eleanor.
Invoked in Season 2, Episode 11, where he suggests that the burrito is the Judge. He turns out to be wrong, but Eleanor points out that a lot of weird things have happened up to that point, and a burrito judge would be downright normal by comparison.
Dumb Is Good: Downplayed. While Jason has done many not good things (such as committing crimes), he doesn't consider them to be too wrong and too underprivileged to really know better, so the show gives him more of a pass. That said, his genuine character flaws and need to improve are pointed out.
Dumb Muscle: Jason is ripped and is generally the first to choose violence as a solution, but he's very, very book dumb.
Everyone Has Standards:
It shows that when he is dating someone, he will always be kind to them and even make them breakfast — at least, cereal. Janet can't eat, but she tells Jason that she fell in love with him because he was nice to her when she was rebooting and didn't know anything. Tahani is won over in Season 2 when he cheers her up after the demons succeeded in torturing her.
Even at his dumbest, he's Above the Influence. In Season 3 when Trevor tried to send him and Tahani away in a taxi after they had drunk several rounds of beer, Jason made sure that Tahani got safely to her hotel room and spent the night in a dumpster, rejecting all of her drunken advances. He also happily stepped aside when she reconnected with Larry Hemsworth.
When trying to save him from damnation, Jason rather bluntly explains that giving Donkey Doug money wouldn't help his situation, as he'd just spend it all.
Extreme Omnivore: Eleanor once watched him eat electrical tape off the roll because he thought it was a Fruit by the Foot that had gone bad. Tahani also had to teach him not to eat candles just because they smell good.
Fanboy: A huge fan of things you'd expect a teenage boy to be into. He loves the Transformers movies, or at least the first one (since it's the only one he references). Also, Pokémon: Michael's idea of a gift for him is a Pikachu balloon, which he's overjoyed to see. He also says ranking the The Fast and the Furious films is the best way to get to know him. He's also a diehard fan of the Jacksonville Jaguars, particularly quarterback Blake Bortles.
Fatal Flaw: His stupidity and lack of impulse control. He does have some sharp and clever moments however like finding out Bad Janet was trying to be Janet in disguise in season 4 when no one else put it together.
Foil:
Most directly to Chidi, to their mutual benefit. Chidi being Book Smart and contemplative helps Jason be more outright ethical and rational, while Jason being Street Smart and impulsive helps Chidi finally become decisive in his decisions and secure in his relationships.
Jason can also be a mirror of Eleanor, due to similar circumstances, but differing conditions:
They both grew up in low-class neighborhoods, but whereas Eleanor had zero love from her parents and had to grow up quickly, Jason grew up in a loving family, but never emotionally matured while he was alive.
Eleanor became selfish and immoral as a survival mechanism, never wanting to have to rely on anyone, or be relied on. Jason, meanwhile, is more amoral and more social, living in and relying on a close-knit community of family and friends who happen to share his ethical shortcomings.
Eleanor, directly or indirectly, caused a lot of problems for people (being a scam artist that might have gotten people killed with fake medicine; causing a laundromat to file bankruptcy while she reaped the benefits from the fallout) while Jason's crimes were pretty petty in nature, and not a whole lot in terms of collateral damage.
A Fool for a Client: He would represent himself in court, against the advice of the judge... and get immediately convicted.
The "Fun" in "Funeral": In the finale, he precludes his walk through the final door with a huge party with everyone he knows in attendance, featuring EDM, breakdancing, and lots of junk food. The reason for the gathering is bittersweet, and everyone's sad to see him go, but everyone also has a great time, and it's clear it's exactly how Jason wants to go out.
Genius Ditz: Jason is capable of surprising intelligence and insight on occasion, most notably being the one to finally reach Gen and get her to see the flaws in the points system. Had it not been for his involvement, the events of the series would have been radically different and it's quite likely the old system would have gone on unchanged.
Good Is Dumb: Played with. While super-friendly, Jason is a very childish petty criminal ruled by his impulses and inability to think through the consequences of his actions; he can also be incredibly selfish. All things considered though, Jason is the nicest of the four, as Eleanor notes, calling him the nice one of the group.
Green-Eyed Monster:
Averted when Tahani gets back together with Larry Hemsworth in Season 3. While he is attracted to her, he happily steps aside and celebrates their engagement. It helps that he found a Jacksonville Jaguars Facebook group at the same time, thanks to Michael and Janet.
Played straight between him and Derek. Derek is showing interest in Janet again and is more refined, and he provokes Jason into killing him.
Hanlon's Razor: He's an illustrative example; he's a career criminal, but not with any malice or disregard towards anyone, he's just too dumb to know any better.
The Heart: The most sincere and heartfelt of the Good Place crew, in spite of his lack of impulse control. Before his death, he managed to use this ability to command and encourage a sixty person dance crew/petty criminals through sheer charisma.
The Hedonist: Jason is primarily concerned with his own instant gratification and amusement. Exploited by Michael as part of the Ironic Hell — he could theoretically have everything he wanted at his fingertips in the Good Place, but has to keep up the facade of being a humble Buddhist monk with no earthly desires or possessions. And while his soulmate is the rich and beautiful Tahani, he can't relate to her upper-class background.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: One of the few characters to have had one of these before Team Cockroach. He and Pillboi were longtime friends and thick as thieves (metaphorically and literally).
Hidden Depths:
He actually is a good dancer, and charismatic enough to lead a giant crew. The problem is that having talent isn't enough to win competitions.
A running theme as the show goes on is that despite (or perhaps because of) his comical levels of stupidity, he possesses a surprising amount of Simple-Minded Wisdom, and at various times in the show manages to raise genuinely poignant points in conversations that seem over his head (though he always phrases them in a very dimwitted way). Notably, despite his childish nature and enthusiasm for... well, everything, he's the first of the Soul Squad to become truly content and ready to depart the Good Place for oblivion, and that contentment allows him to wait thousands of years in a state of zen-like meditation for Janet to show up at the Final Door again after he realizes the gift he had for her was in his other pocket.
Played for Laughs in Season 4's "Mondays, Am I Right?". He casually makes an apt reference to the Montagues and Capulets, to which Chidi responds "How do you know that?" Turns out there's no weird explanation, he just happens to be familiar with that story.
Jason: I've read some books, man! Jeez...
Hilariously Abusive Childhood: Played with; Jason has a tendency to describe aspects of his rather crummy childhood with Dissonant Serenity, and while it's humorous to the audience, the other characters tend to react in a rather understandably horrified way.
Jason: I went to Lynyrd Skynyrd High School in Northeast Jacksonville, which was really just a bunch of tugboats tied together.
Tahani: Didn't you get seasick?
Jason: No, sorry, they were tied together in a junk yard. It wasn't a very good school. For most of my classes, we just sold dirty magazines door-to-door.
Tahani: ...You know, Jason, every single detail about your life is deeply disturbing.
Improvised Weapon: He knows how to make Molotov Cocktails on a second's notice, which comes in handy at least once.
Innocently Insensitive: Compared to Tahani, Jason's more insensitive to laws, norms, and the idea of "oversharing", but he's a lot nicer to people. And he does often make a sincere effort to improve when he finds out how he's acting.
Insistent Terminology: He prefers to call himself a "pre-successful" DJ rather than a "failed" DJ.
Interchangeable Asian Cultures: Is believed to be Taiwanese, when actually he's a Filipino-American from Florida. Ironically, Jacinto in real life is actually of mixed Chinese descent — like many Filipino people.
Jason: That's racist. Heaven is so racist.
Interspecies Romance: Jason, a human in the afterlife, develops a romance (in multiple lives) with Janet, a...well, Janet.
Irony: Come Season 1, he was posing as a Buddhist monk that would sometimes dispense advice. In Season 3, he's actually introspective and gives good advice, only it's not Becoming the Mask since he doesn't remember.
In the finale before departing the Good Place, he spends an extremely long period of time contemplating the nature around him in silent introspection. When Janet points out that this is the sort of thing a monk would do, he doesn't get it.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: On the surface, Jason seems like a moronic robber and serial vandal who tried to cheat his way through life... and he is. But once you actually get to know him, you'll find that he's an extremely loyal friend whose stupidity can lead to genuine kindness, and, just like everyone else, he too improves himself in the afterlife.
Kill It with Fire: Jason has never met a problem that cannot be solved by a Molotov cocktail. (Though it's amazing how often he runs into new problems immediately afterward...)
Kindhearted Simpleton: Played with. Jason is extremely dumb and definitely the nicest of the four, but he is still categorically not a good person — not only did he commit several crimes in life, but he is also ruled by his impulses and can't often see when he's being selfish. However, he is relatively emotionally intelligent compared to the other main characters, and increasingly shows an empathetic and thoughtful side.
Loser Son of Loser Dad: As it turns out, Jason's father is a dim-witted criminal, and in a more horrifying twist, Jason is the more intelligent of the two.
Lovable Rogue: Has little care for the law, but is generally still sweet and personable to pretty much everyone.
Magical Asian: Being a wise Buddhist monk, Jianyu dispenses powerful truths and sage advice without saying a word... Except not. Jason is in fact just a normal human being. This even gets hilariously alluded to in the Season 2 premiere, where he invokes this trope to give Eleanor a bike gear he stole from his soulmate and she spends the rest of the episode convinced that Jason is a "mighty wizard" who gave her a magic amulet to help her in her time of need.
Malaproper: He mispronounces various words or phrases, such as saying "ethnics" instead of "ethics".
Manchild: When he shows Eleanor and Chidi his "Budhole," Eleanor comments the décor — the game consoles, the posters of cars and bikini-clad models — is like "12-year-old boy meets... 13-year-old boy." Jason generally has an immature and child-like mind. It's revealed that he and Jianyu have the same IQ, only Jianyu stopped learning at age eight; at least that was Michael's explanation. There actually is no Jianyu as far as we know.
Marriage of Convenience:
He and Pillboi planned to get married if one of their schemes went awry, under the impression that this would automatically prevent them from being convicted, which is... not how it works. (In the United States, married couples can't be forced to testify against each other, which in some cases, is enough to prevent a conviction—but clearly, Jason and Pillboi leave enough evidence that their testimonies aren't really needed to prove they're guilty.)
In Season Three, Tahani decides to marry him so he can share her fortune. She initially wanted to give him her money, but thanks to her bank putting up a fuss, marrying Jason was easier.
Meaningful Name:
His fake name, "Jianyu", has multiple possible meanings. "Build the universe" or "build the world" could just be a reference to Michael constructing the Good Place, or even a hint about the "Jianyu" identity being fabricated. Another, even more interesting, translation is "prison", hinting both at Jason feeling imprisoned by pretending to be Jianyu and at the real nature of the Good Place.
His real name, Jason, means "healer", which can apply to his function in the friend group, but is just as likely a reference to the mythic hero of the same name who hunted the Golden Fleece.
Missing Mom: He lost his mother to cancer.
Mistaken for Profound: All of his "wisdom" is actually just him staying completely silent and letting people come up with their own answers. He's actually a complete idiot who's bluffing his way through the whole thing. Ironically, when he does try to give advice after his cover is blown, it often ends up being genuinely helpful in spite of sounding like ridiculous nonsense on the surface.
Motor Mouth: Jason has a tendency to share detailed, long-winded tangents, even when they aren't exactly relevant to the topic at hand. Usually Played for Laughs.
Nice Guy: Ditziness and selfishness aside, Jason genuinely tries to be a good person and is very sweet-natured and caring. In fact, the main reason Shawn thinks he belongs in the Bad Place is not that he is a bad person, but that he is from Florida.
Not Quite Dead: The real Jianyu isn't dead, he just achieved such a deep level of meditation that he was mistaken for dead, leading to Jason being mistaken for him. Though given The Reveal of Chapter 13, it's unlikely there even is an actual Jianyu.
Obliviously Evil: Played for both laughs and drama. Jason is well-meaning, but a combination of impetuousness, poor guidance, and sheer stupidity frequently leads him to commit illegal and immoral acts (usually involving theft and fire). He gets along weirdly well with demons, and unknowingly answers every question on Michael's "Bad Place litmus test" with "Yes, [I belong in the Bad Place]".
Jason: Is it just me, or am I acing this test?
Only in Florida: He's from Florida, and does a lot of weird things. When just hearing he's from Florida, Shawn says he must belong to the Bad Place.
OOC Is Serious Business: In Season 4, when it's revealed that Janet is actually a Bad Janet in disguise, Jason promptly turns serious and declares that he's gonna march right down to Hell and punch Shawn in the mouth.
Opposites Attract:
Jason, who may very well be the dumbest person to ever live, falls in love with Janet, an infinite database who knows literally everything.
With Tahani in Season 2 (and to a lesser extent, Season 3). Tahani was a cultured, educated, wealthy philanthropist in life while Jason was an unintelligent, uncouth petty criminal.
Pair the Dumb Ones: Invoked and zigzagged. While Jason is literally Too Dumb to Live, his girlfriend Janet is The Omniscient, knowing everything. That said, Janet is also inexperienced in life and frequently inept at social cues and generally cheerful at inappropriate times due to her programming to always be positive. They pair up, and help each other to learn from experience.
Patriotic Fervor: A city-specific example. He loves his home city of Jacksonville, for reasons no one else can figure out.
The Pollyanna: As Tahani points out, so many aspects of his pre-death life are deeply disturbing; his father was a ludicrously idiotic criminal, his mother was a criminal, his "school" was a bunch of tugboats, where lessons consisted of selling porn mags, and one of the teachers was arrested for having sex with Jason... He didn't really have much of a chance. Even in death he puts up with a lot from the others and Michael (considering they were supposed to be torturous to him). And yet Jason never seems to be bothered by any of these things, rarely stops smiling, and is often trying to help.
Properly Paranoid: Unlike the others, he was the only one suspecting that The Good Place was a "prank show"; he points out that heaven is racist for assuming him to be Taiwanese when he is Filipino, for example, and is vindicated when Eleanor finds out in the first version of the Neighborhood that they're in The Bad Place.
The Quiet One: He's a Buddhist monk who is continuing his vow of silence. Somehow, he is able to make his feelings known anyway. It turns out this is just how he maintains his bluff. When he finally breaks his silence, he reveals he's actually a Filipino DJ who, like Eleanor, was sent to the Good Place in someone else's place.
Rags to Riches: In Season 3 he goes from having the finances of a small-time Florida crook to legally being extremely wealthy after his Marriage of Convenience to Tahani.
Right for the Wrong Reasons: Occasionally. His first guess as to what's going on is that they're on some kind of prank show (sort of right, although he thought it was an actual show) and he even correctly figures out they're in the Bad Place based on his dimwitted observations regarding football and them constantly fighting amongst each other.
Sad Clown: Subverted. Jason has had a very sad and often disturbing life: he lost his mom to cancer when he was very young, and his dad, Donkey Doug, is a Blue-and-Orange Morality type minor gangster who is always pulling him into scrapes. However, Jason doesn't use his humor to deflect from it; he genuinely doesn't seem sad.
Seemingly Profound Fool: Zig-zagged. Things like his calming touch on Michael appear genuinely wise, until we learn Jason's true nature. Then, when we learn who Jason is, it looks like this is what's happening when, for example, he pricks his finger on a cactus and Michael manages to convert that into a parable. Then, when we learn the true nature of the Good Place, it becomes clear that everyone except maybe Chidi, Eleanor and Tahani already knew he had nothing to offer in the wisdom department and the poetic reinterpretations of his semi-random actions were just a way of keeping the charade going. And then by the time they work to change the system, he's actually profound more often than not.
Simple-Minded Wisdom: Most of his Dumbass Has a Point moments stem from this. His direct and simplistic way of thinking can lead him to logical answers, such as reasoning he's in the Bad Place because his "soulmate" doesn't know who Blake Bortles is and the TV doesn't get a certain football channel.
Spanner in the Works:
Michael couldn't anticipate that he would fall in love with Janet and cause the not-a-girl to genuinely fall in love with him in return. This, in turn, led to Michael having a Heel Realization when Janet subconsciously remembered their marriage and was expressing her heartbreak through neighborhood glitches.
In Michael's second attempt, he blows his cover within a single day, throwing Michael's plans off and forcing him to start from scratch again.
Stupid Crooks: Part of his backstory is committing all kinds of ill-conceived and/or impulsive crimes, one of them ultimately resulting in his death. The guy is basically the "Florida Man" meme if it genuinely was all done by one person.
Too Dumb to Fool: In the second iteration, he ruins Michael's plans within a single day because, separated from the others, he forgets he's supposed to be hiding the fact that he doesn't belong.
Too Dumb to Live: He died during the execution of a badly-planned robbery that involved him being locked in a safe. He forgot to put in air holes, thinking just wearing a snorkel inside would help him breathe, and suffocated after doing a number of whippets inside.
Jason: I'm just a dope who died in a safe with a snorkel... [Beat] Who's only now realizing why that didn't work!
Trademark Favorite Food: Jalapeno poppers.
Uptight Loves Wild: In Season 2, the wild and impulsive Jason briefly hooks up with the elegant and uptight Tahani. In the afterlife, his true "soul mate" is the proper and coolheaded Janet.
Vanity License Plate: Among the many, many things that got him sent to the Bad Place was the fact that he had license plates that read "I LUV BUTTS".
Walking Spoiler: It's hard to talk about Jianyu when he's actually an amateur DJ named Jason and, like Eleanor, is also unworthy of being in the Good Place.
We Named the Monkey "Jack": We see that when he became human, Michael named his dog "Jason" after him. The dog's collar is also themed after the Jacksonville Jaguars!