'50s Hair: Starts off looking like a nerd from that era with slicked hair.
'60s Hair: Season 4 shows him with hair with a lack of grease, he then grows it more to keep up with the fashions of the times.
'70s Hair: Throughout the 60s he starts experimenting with the Peacock and Mod fashions of the era, even growing out his hair and ends the series with a very full hairdo with long side burns.
Ambiguously Bi: Harry gives off vibes of this. On at least two separate occasions, he's talked about how a different character is "queer". His crass jokes about what he'd do to Megan reek of Have I Mentioned I Am Heterosexual Today?, and in "Tea Leaves" he talks about how good Charlton Heston looks naked. On the other hand, he's definitely had drunken one-night stands with women (his wife exiles him to the couch for it), so it's fairly likely he has some natural inclination towards women. And then there's Joey's reaction to Harry's attempts to befriend him by telling him he could get him on Peyton Place:
Joey: "Everyplace I've worked, there's always some old fairy who comes on to me, but that was the weirdest by far."
Awful Wedded Life: Harry certainly feels this way in later seasons. Frequently discussing how miserable his home life is, how greedy his children are and how his wife is holding off divorce proceedings until Harry gets a partnership stake. Though given that his wife and family aren't seen in later seasons, and we only have Harry's word for it, it's entirely possible Harry is exaggerating because of how horrible a person he is.
Butt-Monkey: To the point where Harry missing his chance at becoming a partner at the moment where being one would have made him a millionaire is played for laughs. And then in the following episode, he loses even more money in a messy divorce.
Can't Kill You, Still Need You: By the later seasons, the partners have had enough of Harry's behavior to a point where Roger half-seriously considers firing him. The only reason that they keep him around is because Harry and his television department are invaluable to the agency.
Casanova Wannabe: SO hard. In a series where Everybody Has Lots of Sex, he's the guy who never, ever, manages it on his own merits. After his drunken, regretted one-night-stand in season 1, the only time we see him get any, it was being used on him as a bargaining chip by Lakshmi to get him to back off from helping Paul.
Characterization Marches On: In the first two seasons, he was completely devoted to his wife, being legitimately repentant that he had a drunken one-night stand and cheated on her. In the more recent seasons, he Took a Level in Jerkass and is an outright braggart over how often he cheats on his wife.
Demoted to Extra: Despite still being technically a regular character in the second half of Season 7, his role is reduced to the point where he gets barely any more focus than the various secretaries. Even in the series finale, the only thing he gets to do is go to a farewell lunch with Pete.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: Harry constantly complains that he's passed over for a partnership, despite being indispensable to the firm. Heavily Lampshaded in the episode A Tale of Two Cities, where he understands exactly how Hollywood works while Don and Roger are fish out of water — but Don and Roger are convinced that all their errors are the fault of the people in California, not their unwillingness to listen to Harry. By season seven, he has given up on trying to earn respect and becomes a Deadpan Snarker who has no problem with calling out his bosses for ignoring the media department until it bites them in the behind.
Face–Heel Turn: In the earlier seasons, he's one of the more likeable characters, and is clearly remorseful when he cheats on his wife. In the later seasons, however, he becomes SCDP's resident Jerkass, and is only tolerated due to the importance of his department.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Even Pete and Cutler can barely stand Harry and his smarminess.
Happily Married: For the longest time, he fits this trope best out of the married men in the office — he did cheat on his wife once, but it was a drunken one-night stand, he clearly regretted it immediately, and he must have told her, because it's doubtful she could have found out any other way. He was temporarily Exiled to the Couch for it and then forgiven (between seasons). She also has a job of her own and he often takes her advice on work matters. Subverted in Season 4, where he is seen flirting with a model, and in Season 5 it is revealed that he has become unhappy with his marriage and cheats on his wife once more. In "Waterloo", he mentions that his wife is considering divorcing him.
Hidden Depths: He's clearly succeeded despite having fewer advantages than Pete or Ken — he didn't go to an Ivy League school, for instance, and doesn't seem to have their connections. He is ahead of his time on the importance of television — SC's television department was created on his initiative. He was also a photographer in college.
Inadequate Inheritor: In the later seasons, Harry is constantly looking to nose his way into the partners' inner circle. Despite Harry (or at least the department that he runs) being essential to the company's survival, he receives nothing but resistance from the higher-ups, mainly on the grounds that they don't like him.
Harry: Bert, you know how important I am to this company. You were me.
Bert Cooper (visibly disgusted): I was different from you, Mr. Crane, in every way.
Informed Wrongness: There is never any solid reason why the other characters treat Harry like crap, given he isn't exactly guilty of anything that the other main characters haven't already done if not worse. Despite having significant initiative and importance to both companies, often solving many problems with his connections, many of the partners go out of their way to tell him how much they loathe him.
Jerkass Has a Point: Despite his many faults, Harry's not exactly wrong in his assertions that his television department is invaluable to the agency. This is something that even the higher-ups can acknowledge, much to their chagrin and NEVER in Harry's presence.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Helps Kinsey out when Kinsey is at his lowest.
Laser-Guided Karma: Harry spends the latter seasons trying desperately to assert himself as a pivotal member company, eventually chasing after a position as Partner. When he finally gets an offer, he dicks around trying to play hardball with the negotiations. Naturally, at the halfway point of Season 7, he waits too long to sign the contract and misses an opportunity to make millions.
Nerd Glasses: Transitions in style from rounded browlines in the first half of the 1960s to a black and angular thick-framed variety post-Season 4.
Skewed Priorities: He is upset at learning of Martin Luther King Jr.'s death not because a great man who brought hope to millions died, but because the media coverage of his death is preempting programs in which SCDP's commercials were supposed to air, costing the agency money. Pete, of all people, calls Harry out on his insensitive behavior. It's hinted that he had this as early as Season 3. Following JFK's death, Pete notes to Trudy that Harry was, of all things, checking his data to see what programs wouldn't be aired as a result.
Took a Level in Jerkass: At the beginning of the show he was one of the nicest guys in the office, but after his Television department takes off at SCDP, he starts to suffer from a massively inflated ego, not to mention becoming far more overtly sexist. By series' end, every major character seems to loathe him openly.
What You Are in the Dark: Helped Kinsey out even though no one, not even Kinsey, would ever know the full extent of the help.