'50s Hair: Starts off with an artichoke that gradually became an elaborate french twist and beehive well into the 1960s.
'60s Hair: She models several versions of the Beehive Hairdo and bouffants, with high buns and stacked curls. Her hair also gets higher for a time. Sometimes she wears her hair loose into a gentle bouffant.
'70s Hair: Her updos gradually looked more wavy and looser, albeit in elaborate styles, both as a reaction to the less product heavy popular looks and her life as a busy executive and mother.
Alpha Bitch: Sometimes acts this way toward the other women in the secretarial pool, though she is not without her sympathetic traits or humanizing moments. Helps that there are some men that don't ogle her: Don admits to being scared of her at first and Lane only develops a crush on her after knowing her.
Badass Bureaucrat: She eventually gets placed in charge of managing SCDP's finances. She's also the kind of person you do not want to get on the bad side of.
Berserk Button:
When she finds out that her husband voluntarily re-upped for another tour of duty in Vietnam, she's not happy.
She also really hates sexual harassment. In Season 7B, she quits McCann after being repeatedly harassed.
Break the Haughty: Initially the queen bitch of the office, much of the first three years are devoted to knocking her down a peg, in both her personal and professional lives.
Buxom Beauty Standard: Her voluptuous curves catch the eye of many men, who make several comments about her chest. She once got told she should be in the "bra business" because she's a "work of art". She rarely appreciates the attention.
Career Versus Man: Although she's peerlessly good at her job, she explicitly is in the market for a husband and only plans to work until she finds one. She's given a promotion in season four, but it comes with no acknowledged power or prestige. After she marries Greg, she's expected to leave SCDP and she's heartbroken over it. Following her divorce, she strikes a deal with Pete that nets her a non-silent partnership with 5% stake in SCDP. She turns down a chance to be a Trophy Wife to Straight Gay Bob Benson for a chance at real love, and in the end, after dating an older man who wants to "spoil" her and dumps her when she refuses to leave her career behind, starts her own production company.
Consummate Professional: Possibly the most professional of all the people in the office. She will NOT put up with shenanigans if she has anything to say about it.
Disco Dan: A realistic version. Not as bad as Don, but she carries on the early 1960s Cocktail Bombshell look well into 1967, she eventually updates her look to look hipper but retains that Pinup model look well into 1970. This is justified in that she is a woman who looks to The '50s as her best decade, where she came of age and developed a style that suited her body.
The Dreaded: Not only the other secretaries are intimidated by her, but also the men who are —in theory— her superiors. Don Draper was advised in his first week at the agency that she's the one person he shouldn't cross.
Earn Your Happy Ending: At the end of the series, she went from a head secretary who placed marriage and appealing to the Male Gaze as her top priorities to a Junior Executive/Partner/Accounts Woman after divorcing Greg, in all while she lost the romances in she had in the series...she gets the child and starts her own production company.
Even the Girls Want Her: Her roommate in Season 1 propositions her. Joan pressures her into sleeping with a man in retaliation.
Fallen-on-Hard-Times Job: Late in Season 3, Pete encounters Joan working at a department store after she left Sterling Cooper to be a housewife to her surgeon husband, who it turns out is an incompetent oaf and unable to support her.
Family Versus Career: She's gotten what she's always wanted, a doctor husband, a baby, a nice little apartment in the city... and the fifth season opener shows her impatient to come back to work because she values it and because she's valued. Roger's joke advertisement of SCDP as an equal opportunity employer inspires her to walk back into the office and start demonstrating her competence in a bid to save her job. Then she starts a production company with her mother (Holloway-Harris) with a schedule that allows her to both run a company and bond with her young son.
The Fashionista: Doesn't have the usual slender build yet shows off a more office-oriented pinup style that's combined with the artistry of Chanel, though her outfits are designed to flatter her body and get attention from men.
Fiery Redhead: Averted. She loses her temper only a few times and isn't any more fiery than the non-redheads on the show, preferring to use Tranquil Fury or to insult a person, and keeps her temper too tightly controlled.
Freudian Excuse: After 4 seasons of Joan looking down at Peggy for not using her feminine wiles and of Joan herself caring very much of how attractive men regard her and of trying to become a "shadow leader" to her husband even after she was raped by her fiancee; we meet her mother, who did flirt and (initially) preached a "wifely role" for her daughter to follow.
My Mother raised me to be admired.
Foot-Dragging Divorcee: Even after dumping Greg, she maintains a separation from him for her son's sake, then she throws a loud tantrum in reception when she was served divorce papers though this is more out of wounded pride and anger that Greg (who raped her and treated her like an idiot) gets to maintain the high ground.
Glamorous Single Mother: Subverted. She may look the part, but it's not easy raising a baby on her own. Then later it's harder for her go out dating when she has a young son, especially with many a man that's gun shy about dealing with children again.
Good Girls Avoid Abortion: Nope. Joan has had at least two abortions in the past, and considers having another when she becomes pregnant with Roger's child in season 4.
Head-Turning Beauty: Most of the male cast can't stop staring at her or talking about her appearance. She's compared In-Universe to sex symbol of the era Marilyn Monroe.
Hidden Depths: Plays the accordion, and with her stint working for Harry proves herself to have a great deal of business acumen. Also, through most of the first three seasons, almost no one seems to realize that she's running the office.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: She starts off as a relatively low-ranking secretary, but it eventually becomes clear that she's the one holding the agency together.
Hypocrite: Has some shades of this in her initial relationship with Jane Siegel. She chastises Jane for using her sex appeal to attract male attention, when she herself is the office's MrsFanservice and always wears tight, very flattering clothing. She gets a bit of Laser-Guided Karma when Jane marries Roger and comes back to the office to gloat.
Informed Attractiveness: As with Don, it is simply understood by all characters on the show that she is the hottest person in any room she's in (despite the cast consisting of very attractive people), the costume design does help ensure that she is to be a main focus to the audience eye.
Iron Lady: Always a zero-nonsense boss, her commanding style doesn't get softer when she's promoted.
Know When to Fold 'Em: In "Lost Horizon", she only accepts half of the money she's owed as a partner because she knows she can't win against McCann.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She can be very cold and intimidating, and lack of professionalism and respect can make her downright scary, but the moments when she consoles or advises someone make it shine through that, underneath the icy exterior, she's actually a very nice person. Specifically, her relationships with Lane and Peggy (even if it didn't start out that way) bring out the best in her.
Lady in Red: Red (along with green) is one of her colors, and she is one of the sexiest and powerful women on the show.
Meaningful Name: According to this videoher last name "Holloway" can refer to how hollow her ambitions towards the house with a big yard and marriage to Greg and making her way with her beauty are; on the other hand, her first name can be alluded to the strong, courageous, independent Joan of Arc which fits her true nature.
Men Are Strong, Women Are Pretty: She was raised with this mindset by her mother who "raised me to be admired" and only begins to subvert this trope in the Second Season when she's being consulted for non-secretarial tasks and sees how capable she is along with being excited by her job.
Ms. Fanservice: The bustiest woman on the show who wears form-fitting clothing with intent to be admired. Arguably Deconstructed in how the men lust after her so much that they are utterly incapable of seeing her as anything but a sex object.
No Accounting for Taste: Has two ex-husbands, one is a whiny, selfish rapist and the other can best be referred to as a Noodle Incident. She's dated Know-Nothing Know-It-All Kinsey, immature Roger, and the self-centered Richard.
Non-Promotion: To Director of Agency Operations, a meaningless title during the struggling beginnings of SCDP.
Old Maid: Part of her story. In Season 2, Joan gets humiliated when Paul Kinsey copied her driver's license and highlighted her birthdate and stuck it on the breakroom board, revealing that she's 31 and single. She gets engaged to her Jerkass fiancé and goes through with the wedding even afer he raped her, and later after getting divorced, Bob Benson chides her for not accepting his proposal of marriage due to her approaching the age of 40 with a young son and a mother in an apartment; she refuses since she is more willing to marry again for love.
Odd Friendship:
Develops a friendship with Pete, odd given that he sold her out to Herb Rennett, who wanted to sleep with her.
Put on a Bus: She leaves the agency partway through season 3, though she does pop up again during this absence and before too long comes back on board to help kickstart Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce.
Rape as Drama: Joan's fiancé Greg is introduced by raping her on the floor of Don's office. She says no and even attempts to fight him off, but he doesn't care.
Red-Headed Hero: Grew into this as the series progresses, as the audience sees her move away from just being the Office Hottie to being someone who's journey they can identify with.
Resentful Guardian: Played for drama. A man dumps Joan when she reveals she's the mother of a toddler; later, she is sarcastically or sincerely contemplating leaving her child to gallivant with her boyfriend.
Joan: You're ruining my life! (directly to babysitter and indirectly to Kevin)
Kevin: I love you, Mommy.
(Joan cries outside her door)
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!: In "Lost Horizon", Joan finally quits McCann, fed up with all the sexism.
Secret-Keeper: In "Chinese Wall" — and for other secrets a long time beforehand — Joan for Roger.
Servile Snarker: She is willing to make fun of her superiors.
Sex for Services: Prostitutes herself for the sake of SCDP with a client at the suggestion of Pete and with the approval of the partners, excluding Don, getting a partnership in return.
Sexy Secretary: She's actually quite competent as a secretary, but is so attractive that people assume she's just there as eye-candy and is a victim of Slut-Shaming due to it.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Starts out wanting a prosperous, handsome husband who'll take her to live in the suburbs and after her divorce, she states she'll wait forever for a man that loves her.
Slut-Shaming: She plays up her sensuality as a form of soft power and gets a lot of grief for it. Everyone assumes that, because of her sex appeal and the fact that she leans into, this means she's incompetent at any other task.
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: Depending on her mood and who she's talking to, Joan can either be very nice or very rude.
Took a Level in Badass: Finally standing up to her husband, then kicking him to the curb in season 5.
"You're not a good man. You never were. And you know what I'm talking about."
Tsundere: This is apparently the reason Don never made a move on her; she's gorgeous and fun, but terrifying.
Ungrateful Bastard: Joan might be this, especially during the few times Peggy and Don have stood up for her one way or another. Peggy, when she fired Joey for being a misogynistic bully towards her, and Don (also the only partner who had opposed Joan prostituting herself for Jaguar) when he finally told Herb how disgusting he is. Then in 7A, she along with Peggy and Bert are very antagonistic to Don due to things done to the agency (the loss of Jaguar, Tobacco, and Ted as a boyfriend), while the latter two more or less have forgave Don, she wanted to see him ousted from the agency and this lasts into half of next season