'50s Hair: Has a stylized, but slick and masculine look from that era.
Armored Closet Gay: Sal's entire Latin Lover, ladies man persona is put on to cover up the fact that he's gay. When approached by a client who can recognize him for who he is because he too is a Closet Gay, Sal shuts down the entire proposition saying he simply can't.
The Beard: He's gay but marries Kitty between Seasons 1 and 2. Unfortunately, she is not aware that this is her role until months after they are married, and is quite hurt at the realization. She thought they had a legitimate Childhood Friend Romance.
But Not Too Gay: Justified given the time period, and the fact that Sal is extremely careful and conscientious. He's had his opportunities, but has turned (most of) them down.
Camp Gay: A downplayed variant, but compared to the toxic masculinity of the other men in the office, the gay Sal stands out as being a bit more feminine. The downplayed part is at least partially due to him staying in the closet. There's one time he goes full camp when running his Bye Bye Birdie commercial through to his wife Kitty which causes her to realize his sexuality.
Deadpan Snarker: Starts off this way. The majority of his contributions in Season 1 are snarky.
Despair Event Horizon: Lee Garner Jr., SC's largest client, tries to sexually extort him. When he refuses, and Garner demands Roger fire him, which he does, and Don refuses to come to his aid and makes a pointedly homophobic jab. Sal, jobless, calls his wife in despair, lies to her that everything is fine, then goes to drown his sorrows with anonymous sex in Central Park.
Dropped a Bridge on Him: In a rare case of it, he's not killed off, but once Sal is outed, he gets sent his walking papers, and was never seen or mentioned again.
Gayngst: Justified, given the period setting.
Have I Mentioned I Am Heterosexual Today?: In his early appearances especially, he is frequently loudly asserting his womanizing ways and attractiveness to women in a manner that, to modern audiences, comes off as more than a little suspect and unconvincing. It mostly sails right over the heads of the other characters however. It helps that he's less transparent about it than Harry.
Intergenerational Friendship: He's in his 40s, but tends to socialize mainly with his mid-20s colleagues, and tends to emulate their behavior, at least vocally. It's implied that his is part of his attempts to keep up appearances regarding his orientation.
Latin Lover: He plays this trope for maximum cover, with his WASPy colleagues likely seeing this as an explanation for his slight flamboyance. His Italian heritage makes him automatically attractive to at least one doe-eyed secretary that we know of. He's also in the process of becoming a Silver Fox, with grey at his temples.
Nice Guy: Develops into this. Although not without his sneakiness, Sal is one of the better natured men at Sterling Cooper, often showing a friendly, charming side. However, he often feels forced to play the jerkass womanizer to fit in.
Put on a Bus: In Season 3, when he's fired by SC.
What Happened to the Mouse?: Infamously never appeared again after the third season, although according to Word of God he was originally supposed to.