All Men Are Perverts: Despite being the Nice Guy and, usually, the Only Sane Man of the group, he can be just as horny as Hyde and Kelso.
Amazon Chaser: When he and Donna first met as kids, he commented in an impressed, amazed tone on how strong she was.
Back for the Finale: After being Put on a Bus for Season 8.
Beware the Nice Ones: The Forman Rage is strong in this one, as Red proudly pointed out. Eric is a geeky and socially awkward klutz who can never really put up much of a fight... unless he's defending someone he cares about. Anytime his friends or family are being mistreated, he immediately shakes off his usual cowardice and leaps to their defense, whether it be from school bullies, random drunks, or his own dad. "The Keg," "Grandma's Dead," and "What is and What Should Never Be" are all episodes with shining examples of this.
Book Smart: Despite Red's insistance that "the only smart thing about you is your mouth," there are frequent indications that Eric does very well in school, at least when outside factors don't intefere. He is, however, naive about other matters, at least at the beginning of the series.
Borrowed Catch Phrase: In That '90s Show, he threatens to put his foot up Leia's ass. He immediately has a Can't Believe I Said That moment. Kitty and Donna are shocked, while Red has a So Proud of You reaction.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: Deconstructed. In That '90s Show, Eric's immaturity has him perceiving his father as a poor parent due to Red's treatment of him in the past, even going as far as comparing him to Darth Vader. In truth, Red, despite his tough demeanor, proves to be a better parent than any of the gang's. On the other hand, Eric's efforts to enroll his daughter in space camp fall short, as she does not share the same interest as him. What Eric doesn't know is that by forcing Leia to have to indulge in something she has little-to-no interest in, he is essentially replicating what his father attempted with him during his youth .
But I Would Really Enjoy It: He loves Donna, but both of them have doubts about consummating their relationship until mid-Season 2.
Butt-Monkey: Guess who's the butt of the jokes 80% of the time?
Calling Parents by Their Name: Behind Red's back, Eric often calls him by his name.
Characterization Marches On: Early on, Eric was far less of a Deadpan Snarker and more a put-upon everyman, This Loser Is You kinda guy. His fandom of Star Wars was also originally not limited to him, but extended to the rest of the male members of the gang as well. In addition, Eric becomes lazier to near childish levels in the later seasons.
Childhood Friend Romance: With Donna, as they befriended each other as children, dated as teens, and continue with a Will They or Won't They? to their adulthood.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: As weak as he's often made out to be, he always displays "the Forman rage" whenever he's in a fight. He's also a deadly accurate shooter.
Deadpan Snarker: This quality is why Red calls him "Smartmouth", a trait Red says he gets from his mother.
Digging Yourself Deeper: He does this a lot. Hyde calls him "The Little Engine That Could of Screwing Yourself".
Ditzy Genius: He has moments of being rational, intelligent and is shown to have a good work ethic due to his geekiness but is just as goofy, impulsive, and immature as most of the group.
The Dog Bites Back: Eric, of all people, furiously calls out on Red, of all people, who'd rather keep his Corvette and refuse to be there for Kitty when she's having a pregnancy scare.
Dumbass Teenage Son: He's this in the eyes of his father Red, and while he's nowhere near as dumb as Kelso, neither is he a paragon of sensibility.
The Dutiful Son: He is this compared to his sister Laurie. After Red has a heart attack (which Laurie was partly responsible for causing), she ditches the family. Eric, meanwhile, puts off going to college to get a job as a waiter to help support the family. Red begins to acknowledge this more and more as the series goes on.
Extreme Doormat: In an alternate future where he never kissed Donna, he's no longer has the smart mouth that Red complains about, but he is also a complete pushover.
Foolish Sibling, Responsible Sibling:
The responsible to Laurie's foolish.
After Hyde moves in at the end of the first season, he can be seen as the foolish to Hyde's responsible.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Phlegmatic.
Geek Physiques: He's often teased for his skinniness.
Geeky Analogy: Keeps comparing himself to Luke Skywalker, or sometimes Spider-Man. The latter becomes funnier since his actor would eventually play Venom.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Hyde. They both were able to say "Indy 500" simultaneously when having to come up with a lie about what they were talking about when Kelso showed up.
Honor Before Reason: After Casey broke up with her, Donna was distraught and eventually went back to Eric. However, he pushed her away on the grounds that he won't just be some second choice on the rebound. He had too much dignity for that, much to the confusion of his parents. Kitty calls him a dumbass for it.
Red: So, you're too proud to take her back? And what do you have to be so proud of? You're not an athlete. The only smart thing about you is your mouth. And look at you.
Kitty: Red, he looks fine. He's just so darn stupid!
Hypocritical Humor: He wasn't happy about Kelso fooling around with Laurie, in part because of how annoying he found Hyde's "nailed your sister" jokes. He gleefully changes his tune in Season 7 when Kelso hooks up with Angie (Hyde's half-sister), saying he "suddenly" realized how funny those jokes can be.
Eric: Sticks and stones may break my bones, but Kelso nailed your sister.
Informed Flaw: Is constantly mocked as geeky and unattractive. While he is a geek through and through, he is far from ugly. Though most insults tend to focus on him being a geek rather than his looks. Aside from Donna, several attractive women (and even one man) express an interest in him over the course of the series.
I "Uh" You, Too: When Donna first tells him that she loves him, his response is "I love... cake."
Jerkass Ball: More and more often as time goes on.
Last-Name Basis: He is referred to by his last name by Hyde.
Lazy Bum: After Hyde moves in with the Formans and starts pitching in with chores, he discovers that they're actually not too difficult and concludes that Eric's constant complaints about them were because he was just being lazy. It gets worse in season seven where after calling out his wedding with Donna, he spends an entire year lazing around until he realizes how much time had wasted. In the sequel series, it is shown that he has become a Lazy Husband who wouldn't help his wife to carry the luggage.
Like Father, Like Son: That '90s Show reveals that despite being as geeky as ever, he has become both of his parents. He's clingy and always worried about his daughter just like Kitty, but at one point tells Leia that if she doesn't listen to him he will put his foot in her ass just like Red.
Lovable Nerd: He's socially awkward, clumsy, and geeky but usually manages to be charming, sweet-natured, and lovable.
Manchild: Interest aside, Eric gets progressively immature as the series progress and acts like a lazy spoiled brat. He becomes better in the sequel series but still believes that Star Wars is real and often takes quotes and lessons from the movies in his parenting.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: Feminine boy to Donna's masculine girl.
Kitty: "Eric? Honey, could you get the Thanksgiving turkey out of the freezer? Oh, wait. It's a 20-pounder. Donna, could you get the Thanksgiving turkey out of the freezer?"
Mature Younger Sibling: Despite being a nerdy stoner, he's much more responsible and level-headed than his slutty and ditzy older sister, Laurie.
Maybe Ever After: The show ends with Eric returning to Point Place with his relationship with Donna unclear, but the sequel series showed they did get married and had a daughter.
Mistaken for Cheating: In the episode “Eric’s Panties,” Donna suspects Eric of cheating after finding a pair of pink panties and learning he’s been tutoring another girl. However, it’s all a big misunderstanding—the panties actually belong to Midge, not the girl Eric was tutoring.
Mistaken for Gay: By Buddy in Season 1. When Eric asks Buddy why he made a move on him, Buddy explains his attraction is very likely the same things Donna likes about him and there was probably a little wishful thinking involved too.
Momma's Boy: To Kitty. Eric has a better relationship with his mother than Red and doesn't refer to her by her first name even in private (unlike his father). And Eric becomes notably protective of Kitty if she is wronged by someone in some way.
Motive Decay: Deconstructed. Previously, Eric wanted to leave home and be with Donna, but the former got derailed by Red's heart attack at the end of Season 5, while the wedding was ultimately called off at the end of Season 6. At the start of Season 7, Eric decides to just take a year off and do various goofy activities—much to Red's increasing irritation. It reaches a head in "You Can't Always Get What You Want" and Eric admits he just doesn't want to lock himself into a path he might hate later. Red agrees to give him six months to figure out what he wants, and Eric ultimately decides to become a teacher.
Muscles Are Meaningless: Zigzags. He is shown to be not very strong, but when he fights he completely dominates guys that have much more weight, except for Hyde.
Naked People Are Funny: One episode reveals that he sleeps in the nude sometimes. Red spends the rest of the episode ribbing him about it.
Never My Fault: Often does this in many episodes. He was caught masturbating in the bathroom by Donna in one episode and then blames her because she doesn't want to have sex with him. If he is in a situation where there is no one else to blame, he will just say he has bad luck.
Nice Guy: This quality makes him stand out from the rest of the group; Eric is always willing to help someone out. But he can be very cocky, brash, and insensitive sometimes.
Noble Male, Roguish Male: Noble to Hyde's Roguish. Zigzagged in later seasons.
Oblivious to Love: He's actually oblivious that he is still in love with Donna in season four after breaking up with her in the previous season. His family and friends on the other hand can still see it. It took some scolding from his parents and seeing Donna moving on for him to finally realize his feelings for her.
Only Sane Man: To his friends and usually his parents.
OOC Is Serious Business: He's all for hiding the gang's rulebreaking and misadventures from his parents (though, naturally, he doesn't always succeed). However, when he learns that Hyde's mother abandoned him, and sees that Hyde really can't manage on his own, regardless of what he says, Eric goes to his parents and spills the beans, asking them to help his friend. They do.
Open Mouth, Insert Foot: There's a reason why Red tends to call him a smart-mouth. Whenever he says something, he tends to piss off someone else, either by saying the wrong thing or trying to act smart.
Parental Favoritism: Played with. It's obvious in the early seasons that his sister Laurie is Red's clear favorite and she can do no wrong in his eyes, whereas he is constantly belittling Eric, his friends and his interests. However, while Red may dote on Laurie, it’s also revealed he doesn't think she's capable of much and only sees her as someone others have to take care of. Meanwhile, Red is hard on Eric because he expects a lot more from him. Played straight with Kitty, as it's shown many times that she prefers him over Laurie.
Parents as People: In That '90s Show, he's shown trying to be a more involved father with his daughter Leia, likely to make up for Red's strict parenting style. However, he doesn't stop to consider that Leia doesn't share the same interests as him and wants her own experiences.
Promoted Fanboy: In-Universe example. He goes from a Star Wars fan in the 1970s to a college professor in That '90s Show who teaches a 'course' on Star Wars.
Put on a Bus: At the end of Season 7.
Ridiculously Average Guy: Eric is the most average and normal of his group of friends. Eric also has a string-bean physique which is referenced multiple times. Lampshaded by Jackie.
Jackie: Michael's the looks, Steven's the brains, and you? Your house has food.
Runaway Fiancé: By the end of Season 6, Eric had doubts about going through with his marriage with Donna and runs away. Donna was initially furious, but after a talk with a returning Eric, both of them admitted that they were not ready for marriage.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Sensitive guy to Hyde's manly man.
Small Name, Big Ego: As Red usually scolds him, "The only smart thing about him is his mouth," yet he often brags about how great he is.
Spoiled Brat: Hyde feels that Eric's one because he's a lazy, mouthy, selfish, and whiny Momma's Boy but he's obviously not as bad as his sister.
Straight Man: What Eric often is to Donna, Jackie, Kelso, Hyde, and Fez.
Took a Level in Dumbass: Eric seems to have lost a lot of brain cells in later seasons and tends to make stupid mistakes or said the wrong things that get him into trouble. Heck, he even makes Kelso smart at times. If he isn't a dumbass at the beginning of the series, he sure is now.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Later seasons portray Eric as a selfish, brash, and lazy manchild with zero ambition who doesn't treat his girlfriend with much respect as he does in previous seasons.
The Un-Favorite: He begins the show as this to his father Red. Red seems to find it difficult to relate to him as he's not into sports and his personality isn't very similar. This changes over the course of the series as Eric proves himself the more responsible sibling upon learning of Laurie's behavior, and on occasion will tell Eric how proud he is of him.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Hyde. They're best friends, but love to snark at each other
"Well Done, Son" Guy: He's always looking for Red's approval.