Abhorrent Admirer: He had a crush on Jackie since the start but Jackie had never returned his feelings for most of the show, until the final season.
Always Camp: Let's just say he is quite flamboyant.
Ambiguously Bi: While his attraction to women is confirmed, he also constantly fawns over Kelso and even once had a sex dream about Kelso giving him a sponge bath.
Fez: He's got a way about him. You know, when he talks to you, it's like... you're the only one in the room.
Hyde: You're, like, half in love with him, aren't you?
Ambiguously Brown: Part of his Non-Specifically Foreign characterization.
Appropriated Appellation: With time, he started using the nickname "Fez" as his actual given name, to the point of naming his business seen in That '90s Show "Chez Fez".
Big Eater: Coupled with his sweet tooth, he is nearly always seen snacking on something. He has a love affair with American junk foods after a lifetime of subsisting on the Foreign Queasine of his home nation. In the Scooby-Doo animated circle, Fez is seen eating almost like Shaggy.
Butt-Monkey: Being the effeminate, unlucky-with-the-ladies guy.
Camp Straight: Though it has been hinted from time to time that he's attracted to/in love with Kelso.
Casanova Wannabe: For most of the show he's a horny wannabe ladies’ man known for his pathetic attempts to get girls, until the final season when he becomes more successful.
Catchphrase:
"Good day." / "I said good day!"
Various uses of "son of a bitch!"
Characterization Marches On:
Fez's original character was that of a Funny Foreigner who misunderstood American culture. He didn't develop his constant desire to do it and love of candy for quite a while.
Early on, after making a tape of their ramblings in the circle, Fez called Kelso stupid. Later on, Fez would rush to his defense when Hyde or even Eric called Kelso stupid.
Chivalrous Pervert: His creepy perversion and sex obsession rivals Kelso but unlike Kelso, he's more sensitive to women's feelings and is more gentlemanly than most characters. Fez shows that he can actually be quite charming and is also a good dancer but is often dismissed for being an eccentric and immature foreigner that's naive to American culture and etiquette which also makes Fez feel quite lonely and insecure.
Cloudcuckoolander: Biggest one in the group along with Kelso. He is openly regarded as weird by his friends.
Culture Clash: Especially in the early seasons when his unfamiliarity with U.S culture was a Running Gag. Apparently, before becoming an exchange student, he had virtually no exposure at all to western media or pop culture.
Establishing Character Moment: Fez's first line in the first episode sums up everything you need to know about him.
"I may not say this right because I am new to English, but she has tremendous breasts, yes?"
Foreign Exchange Student: The name "Fez" is even short for "foreign exchange student", despite the difference in spelling, which the series' official website describes as "poetic license". His friends know Fez's real name but consider it unpronounceable.
Formerly Fit: Temporarily. He put on some weight at the beginning of the final season, prompting a couple of jokes from Kelso and a blunt "You're fat" from Hyde. The jokes stopped after episode 6.
Funny Foreigner: Even the characters aren't sure what country he's from, though Wild Mass Guessing favours Trinidad and/or Tobago.
Have I Mentioned I Am Sexually Active Today?: Early on, he sometimes tried to pretend he wasn't still a virgin, not that any of the other characters bought it for a second.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Kelso, with the two become very close friends over the course of the show. Which only makes it more sad that Fez now hates Kelso by That '90s Show due to Jackie leaving him for Kelso.
Idiot Ball: Though, most of this has to do with him being unfamiliar with American customs. Because of his limited knowledge outside of his customs and his insatiable needs, he naturally thinks highly of Kelso.
I'll Be in My Bunk: As the seasons go by, he gets more comfortable indicating this. On one occasion, Nina got him worked up, but it didn't go any further, so he made it clear this was to be the case. A squicked out Donna said they're all clearly getting too comfortable with each other.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: While he's easily the biggest overzealous pervert of the group to the point that he regularly pervs on his friends to try and watch them do it, he still manages to be a genuinely friendly, sensitive and sweet-natured gentleman, possibly even more so than Eric himself. In one episode, when he notices how hostile Caroline was being towards his friends, he confronts her and then breaks up with her.
Large Ham: Fez is a passionate, flirtatious and flamboyant character and like Kelso, his eccentric personality is always hilarious.
Lovable Sex Maniac: Fez's lechery is almost always played for laughs.
Mistaken for Gay: A running gag directed towards Kelso throughout the series. In S7 Ep 20, "Gimme Shelter" happens to him and Kelso. They're looking for an apartment and find a great one only to discover the landlord is Fenton, an enemy of Fez, who refuses them a lease. As they're leaving Kelso comments that they'll have to find someplace to live with the baby, referring to his with Brooke, however, Fenton misinterprets this and lets them move in since he can't turn away two men raising a baby.
My Sister Is Off-Limits: In a throwaway joke, Fez mentions his relief that his sister is thousands of miles away from Kelso.
Kelso: And if things don't work out with Angie, I'm on the first plane out!
No Name Given: His real hame has never been revealed, it is only known that it is very long and hard to pronounce. When he introduced himself to the gang, his name was drowned out by the school bell. Those who try to read it either stop to ask how it's pronounced (like Christine St. George did) or immediately give up (like the announcer at the Roller Disco).
Non-Specifically Foreign: He is from some ambiguous foreign country (probably from somewhere in South or Central America). Most likely a former colony, as it's revealed in the last season it has a sizeable population of British and Dutch citizens. They also apparently won a war against the English.
Only Known by Their Nickname: "Fez". So-called due to his Overly Long Name, see below.
Overly Long Name: Fez' real name and home country in the early years; taken to the point of a Running Gag. When Fez does say his real name but is drowned out by the bell, in real life he was reciting all the actors on the series' names. This gag is eventually retired and “Fez” is depicted as being his actual name.
Progressively Prettier: Gets more muscular by each season.
Really Gets Around: In the final season he becomes a ladies' man and is seen with three different women in the same episode.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Sensitive guy to Kelso's manly man.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: He and Fenton are this to each other.
Sixth Ranger: Fez is the newest member of the group at the beginning of the series.
Stalker with a Crush: He's this to Jackie and Donna. At some point, he tells Jackie, "You're a super cute high school girl that I've been spying on through a window for three and a half years".
Sweet Tooth: And how.
"WHERE'S MY CANDY YOU SON OF A BITCH!?"
Those Two Guys: With Hyde up until season five, where Hyde starts dating Jackie, and Kelso starts hanging out with Fez.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Over the middle to later seasons he becomes even more creepy, perverted and all around disgusting towards his friends, to the point that he hides in closets and other locations to spy on women or on his friends in couples and repeatedly makes unwanted moves on women.
Took a Level in Kindness: Downplayed in the sequel series; While he’s still very fond of sexual relations, Fez no longer behaves the way he did as a teen and is content with committing to one woman. His pervy nature now seems a lot more silly than predatory.
The Unintelligible: The others treat Fez like his English borders on incomprehensible, rather than the notable but not overwhelming accent he actually has.
The Un-Reveal:
In one of the last episodes, his best friend from back home comes for a visit. He turns out to be... a different ethnicity and has a different accent (as he "comes from the other side of the island"). The end credits feature the gang quizzing them both about their country, but they only offer vague answers.
The same also applies to his real name: said best friend never calls Fez by any name throughout the episode.
What the Hell Is That Accent?: Enforced by Fez's actor, Wilmer Valderrama, to add to the Running Gag about Fez's unknown home country.
Where the Hell Is Springfield?: A Running Gag was that Fez often gave contradictory information about his home country while also never revealing exactly which one it was. He may have made some of these things up to mess with his friends, though.