Advertised Extra: In Season 8. So much to where he’s prominently featured on the cover and disc art of the season’s initial DVD release (via Twentieth Century Fox, which is now out of print, as of 2019).
Ambiguously Bi: During a discussion about whether Eric's new friend, Buddy, is gay, Michael doubts it since if Buddy is indeed gay, he would have been fawning over him, indicating that while Michael prefers being with women, he also doesn't mind being with men.
Amusing Injuries: If Kelso does something stupid (which is usually Once per Episode) he will invariably hurt his eye.
Attractive Bent-Gender: Played with. Jackie seems to have a Fetish for androgynous men wearing feminine clothes, so she makes Kelso wear a summer dress and put makeup on.
Back for the Finale: After being Put on a Bus for most of Season 8.
Boisterous Weakling: Kelso talks a good game, but he can never back it up. To the point where he has never won a fight, except possibly when he and Hyde took on the guys who harassed Fez and punched out Eric in a bar fight.
Braces of Orthodontic Overkill: Flashbacks in "Reefer Madness" and "Class Picture" show him with braces and headgear during his junior high days.
Brainless Beauty: An idiotic male bimbo.
Breakout Character: Season seven even saw a shift of storylines focusing more on his Character Development than Eric's.
Brilliant, but Lazy: Scored surprisingly well on the SATs. He initially tries to exploit his newfound potential, but gives up when he learns it won't help him get women. Also in one early episode, he was able to tinker with a video game to make it more challenging, and in another, he was able to quickly calculate in his head how much money they would make from a kegger and was even able to quickly change his calculation to account for how much less the younger partygoers would drink.
Butt-Monkey: Downplayed. Most of his comical mishaps are well-deserved, and he usually brings them onto himself with his own stupidity. It's more Karmic Butt-Monkey than this trope.
Catchphrase: "BURN!" and "Damn, Jackie" (when he's upset with Jackie). He also immediately whines "My eye!" when dragged into a fight.
Character Development: Matures significantly during the final two seasons, though he never becomes unrecognizable. Becoming a father motivates him to get his life together and become a (somewhat) functional adult.
Chick Magnet: He's very successful with girls. Humorously, he doesn't seem to understand that this doesn't apply to everyone, as he once cluelessly asked Fez how he could still be a virgin with all the women constantly throwing themselves at him, much to Fez's anger.
Childhood Brain Damage: He was apparently dropped on his head when he was a baby.
Kitty: What is wrong with you?! Were you dropped on your head?!
Kelso: Yes! I was! And up until now, everyone had the good grace not to mention it!
Children Raise You: After getting Brooke pregnant, Kelso initially wants nothing to do with the child but eventually comes to accept it. Kelso slowly becomes more responsible such as sending Brook to the hospital and finding a job so his daughter can have someone to look up to. He even dials down his pervertedness because of her and is visibly disturbed by Fez's obsession with breast milk.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: He will gladly sell out his friends in the hopes of saving himself. When Red caught them in "Misty Mountain Hop" with a stash, Kelso insisted he knew nothing about it while saying Hyde did. He added in Fez just for the hell of it. And oh yeah, Kelso paid for and hid the stash in the cabin in the first place.
Cloudcuckoolander: Being the idiot of the group, he's probably the biggest offender.
Crazy Jealous Guy: With Jackie despite the fact that he constantly cheats on her.
The Ditz: His most famous personality traits are conceit and sheer stupidity, performing a great number of idiocies on a regular daily basis.
Dumbass Has a Point: Occasionally shows flashes of common sense:
When Kelso wants to find out if he's the police academy stooge, Donna suggests just asking his commander, but Kelso reminds her that not knowing is the whole point.
In the above-mentioned keg episode, two bullies get mad at him for not having a working tap, but Kelso angrily reminds them that they're the ones who broke it.
In a later episode, when the guys were paranoid that Kitty's vacuum was bugged by the feds, they end up destroying it, only for Kelso to be the first one to realize that they could have just put the vacuum outside.
He was the one who identified his brother Casey as bad news and warned Eric about it long before anyone else.
Cheating on Jackie was definitely wrong but he is right that she is domineering, rude and borderline abusive and eventually stops apologizing for his infidelity, claiming it as a response to her treatment.
Even the Guys Want Him: Describes himself as "man-pretty". Kelso and Fez freely admit they find each other mutually handsome.
Everyone Has Standards:
Despite being oversexed, constantly sleeping around and even making small passes at Donna from time to time, he's the most vocal opponent of anyone doing anything sexual in the circle, which he considers sacred. In defending this stance he admits he's had sex in both a church and a cemetery.
He is literally the only one in "Everybody Loves Casey" besides Eric to speak poorly of Casey and his relationship with Donna, warning Eric something bad would inevitably happen.
Kelso: [to Eric] And I'm telling you as his brother, Casey is bad news. He's either gonna get bored and split, or something worse is gonna happen, so you gotta do something.
Despite making fun of Fez a lot, even calling him "Captain Pooface" when they first met, Kelso agrees that Nina's racist parents are jerks for saying Fez can't be her boyfriend just because he's "different". He even gives Fez and Nina a congratulating Fist Pump when they leave the basement to get back at said parents by having sex on their bed.
Kelso: He might not be from this country but he's beautiful, dammit!!
While he cheats on Jackie multiple times, it's only as a response to her treatment of him and he never does so with Brooke or Angie, showing he is capable of honoring relationships with partners who are respectful of him.
Fair Cop: Became a police officer specifically because the uniform would prolong his beauty many years.
First Guy Wins: The first guy Jackie dates and, as That '90s Show reveals, the one she ultimately ends up with.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Sanguine
The Friend Nobody Likes: He's an immature teenager who ends up causing problems for his friends and constantly goes out of his way to make their lives worse For the Lulz. By the later seasons, it's more that he's tolerated by the others and allowed to hang around because he's easy to make fun of than genuinely liked.
Fun Personified: Even lampshaded by Red at one point.
Genius Ditz: He has occasional flashes of intelligence showing there is a brain somewhere underneath his ditziness.
Handsome Lech: A dumb, oversexed Pretty Boy who is capable of getting women with his good looks.
Has a Type: All of his prominent love interests boss him around to a degree. By his own admission, he likes being on the short leash and under a woman's thumb. It only goes so far, though; he realizes he cheated on Jackie because of her repeated insults, while Laurie treated him even worse and ultimately broke his heart. Brooke and Angie clearly wore the pants, as it were, but they consistently treated Kelso with respect, and he was much happier for it.
Henpecked Husband: He ends up this to Jackie, to the point that half of their dialogue on-screen is her yelling at him.
Heroes Love Dogs: There are several episodes where he shows up late for something because he was busy playing with some random dog he met on the way, and he considers a neighbor getting a new dog to be a major event.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Fez.
Hidden Depths:
Because he was one of the older siblings, he has a real knack for taking care of babies. Related, he lets it slip in "Moon Over Point Place" that he makes a good bit of money babysitting.
He also comes to realize that his constant cheating on Jackie was due to her domineering attitude towards the relationship, and decides that he does not apologize for it in an argument. Notably, he never cheats on Brook or Angie, who are actually nice to him.
While he was mostly Book Dumb (and other kinds of dumb), he seemed to understand electronics pretty well. Helping Red fix an Atari, when Red’s about to “take off the doohickey”, Kelso says “ Don’t you think we should disconnect the transistor from the secondary circuit board first?”
Hypocrite: He becomes angry at Jackie for dating Hyde while he is away when he cheated on her several times with Laurie, as well as Pam Macy.
Implausible Deniability: Everyone initially refuses to believe he slept with Brooke, since they don't think he could get a smart and classy older woman like that. When Brooke comes to the basement and says she needs to talk to Kelso about their night together, Kelso triumphantly yells "Burn!" at each of his friends in turn, runs upstairs to yell it at Red and Kitty, then runs back down and announces "We totally did it!". Brooke then reveals she's pregnant and after a moment of shocked silence he turns to the others and says "I swear to God, I never touched her".
Informed Attractiveness: He goes on and on about how hot he is, and is never corrected. Apparently his hottitude is a matter of record in the T70S 'verse. While Ashton Kutcher is certainly good-looking, Kelso's attractiveness reaches memetic levels on the show.
Iron Butt-Monkey: He's the member of the group most likely to be injured, whether by falling flat on his face while trying to show his dance moves, falling off the local water tower, jumping out of a moving car, constantly setting himself on fire, trying moronic stunts like "car skiing" or somehow burning himself under water.
It's All About Me: He manages to be more selfish then everyone else in the group except Jackie.
Jerkass: Kelso's worst traits are his shallowness, narcissism, insensitivity and self-absorbtion. Though he becomes more of a Jerk with a Heart of Gold as the series progresses.
Jerkass Has a Point:
He points out in episode 17 of season 6 that Fez and Hyde are immature, stuck in high school and are afraid to let him move on with his life after they shaved his mustache to make it look like Hitler's.
While Kelso refusing to take responsibly after finding out Brooke is pregnant is a dick move, he's absolutely right that it's easy for Hyde to judge him regarding the "right thing to do" when he has no investment in the situation.
Karmic Butt-Monkey: Probably the biggest and most satisfying one in the show. Almost all of Kelso's comical mishaps are well-deserved be it either his own idiocy or his own irresponsibility. Below are merely a few prominent examples:
The show recalled on two separate occasions, the many times Hyde physically retaliated against Kelso's trouble-making which led to Kelso's running gag of "Ow, my eye".
Him cheating on Jackie, or irresponsibly hooking up with other girls over the various seasons eventually gotten him into trouble. In Season 2 particularly, he cheated on Jackie with Laurie, and got caught by Jackie only when he tried to break things off with Laurie. He then received a dose of Poetic Justice in Season 3 when he was dating Laurie and caught Laurie cheating on him.
Kelso trying to win Jackie back during the events of Season 3 and 5 backfired for him on many occasions when either his own character flaws or events out of his control got in the way.
Kelso proudly proclaimed his loud and bombastic "burn" on his friends after Brooke admitted to having a quickie with Kelso. However, he ironically received the biggest, non-uttered "burn" when Brooke's next line revealed she became pregnant from that quickie.
In general, for all his big talk and attempts in delivering "burns", Kelso usually ended up being the recipient of most of the "burns".
Large Ham: Kelso's energetic, dramatic and boisterous and his loudness is consistently Played for Laughs.
Laser-Guided Karma: Kelso cheated on Jackie with Laurie, only to later on learn that Laurie is cheating on him. Unlike other examples in this trope, a hurt Kelso (dumb as he is) realizes how much he hurt Jackie and therefore believes he deserved to be hurt like this himself.
Last-Name Basis: Just like Hyde, he's called Kelso by everyone except for Jackie and Kitty.
Long-Haired Pretty Boy: Pulled this off for some of the seasons, in classic '70s Hair fashion, but gets his hair cut in season 7 right after his daughter is born, though he says it's because he got gum in it.
Lovable Coward: Can be either this or a Dirty Coward. Invoked in episode Halloween, when Kelso hears a noise which he takes for a vengeful spirit; he pushes his girlfriend out of the way in his haste to flee.
Jackie: I can't believe Michael pushed me aside.
Donna: Me neither. I thought he'd use you as a human shield.
Manchild: He possesses numerous infantile qualities such as enjoying Christmas specials deemed childish by his peers and fussing when something is preventing him from viewing them. Although to be fair, calling him a manchild is slightly a little stretching given the character's age (17-19).
Massive Numbered Siblings: Michael is one of 7 siblings.
Narcissist: To the point that he literally dreams of another Kelso sponge bathing him.
Never My Fault: He tells his friends that he is not responsible for the fire at the police academy...while explaining what was he doing prior to the fire.
NO INDOOR VOICE: He has the loudest voice of anyone in the group, especially when he's angry or excited. There's a reason why his catchphrase is yelling "BURN!!!" at the top of his lungs.
One Head Taller: With Jackie.
Playboy Has a Daughter: Brooke reveals to him she's pregnant with his daughter in one of the show's later seasons, forcing him to grow from shallow and oversexed into a responsible adult who respects women. He even refused to grope Donna's breasts when given the opportunity. To drive this point home, earlier episodes have shown him to be quite eager to even glimpse Donna's breasts.
Pretty Boy: Necessary component of his The Brainless Beauty act.
Proud Beauty: One of the things he has in common with Jackie.
Put on a Bus: Somewhat in season 8. He only appears in the first four episodes and the series finale. For these five appearances, Ashton Kutcher is credited as a “Special Guest Star”.
Really Gets Around: "I had two girlfriends. And a little action on the side."
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Manly man to Fez's sensitive guy.
Serial Adulterer: One of his defining character traits. He cheats on Jackie by repeatedly making out with Pam Macy in Season 1, and again by starting a sexual relationship with Laurie in Season 2. Later seasons reveal that he had "a little" action on the side as well.
Shipper on Deck: He surprisingly becomes one for Jackie and Hyde in later seasons, even successfully helping get them back together in one episode.
Sibling Yin-Yang: To his brother Casey. Kelso is stupid and hedonistic but he's generally sincere and well-meaning and cares about those close to him. Casey is smart but callous, manipulative and tosses people, especially girls, aside the second they cease being useful to him. Kelso can be a jerk but it's generally due to being oblivious and self-centered and not done with malice while Casey is fully aware of what he's doing and actively enjoys being awful. Even Kelso outright says Casey is a bad person.
Small Name, Big Ego: Like Jackie, he thinks he is the most handsome person in town.
Stupid Sexy Flanders: Oh, Fez.
Token Evil Teammate: "Evil" may be too strong of a word, but Kelso is childish, selfish, cowardly, and has no qualms about selling out anyone to save his own skin.
Too Dumb to Live: For starters, fell off the water tower... once a year... throughout every year of school.
Took a Level in Dumbass: Though the initial dumbass level was very high.
Toxic Friend Influence: It's between him and Hyde over who is the more toxic, but Kelso goes out of his way to make his friend's lives worse.