Abusive Parents: Even before his mother abandoned him, she was shown to be very emotionally abusive towards him. 90% of his mom's dialogue towards him was filled with contempt and blaming him for ruining her chances at being successful.
Accidental Marriage: His relationship with Sam was this as they drunkenly got married during Hyde's stay in Vegas. And like many other example of this, it was also "Accidental Bigamy" as Sam was already married and never divorced her first husband, so her marriage with Hyde isn't valid, and she returned to Vegas.
Brilliant, but Lazy: He's probably the smartest character on the show, but has no ambition or motivation to do anything but sit around in a basement.
Brutal Honesty: Well let's just say don't expect him to sugarcoat anything. When interviewed for a job at Fatso Burger, he even states that his weakness is being brutally honest, and immediately calls the interviewer a pinhead.
Calling Parents by Their Name: Because of his poor relationship with them, Hyde calls his parents by their names, sometimes right at their faces. Since Edna and Bud are horrible parents to begin with, they don't seem to mind. Hyde also calls his actual (and much nicer) father by his name as well though this is mostly because he doesn't know him well.
Calling the Old Man Out: After holding it, Hyde finally vents at Bud for abandoning him and then coming back like nothing happened. Bud doesn't even try to fight back, copping to every bad thing he did and saying he deserves to be yelled at. This infuriates Hyde even further because it's no fun doing this trope when the target immediately caves. They have some beers instead.
Character Development: While he still stays the same lazy stoner at his core, he does mature and become more responsible thanks to Kitty and Red's influence.
Chocolate Baby: After Hyde meets his real father, William Barnett, who's black, Hyde mentions his mother must have been pretty relieved when he came out white.
Chuck Cunningham Syndrome: There’s not a single mention of him in the sequel series.
Commitment Issues: Mostly the reason he and Jackie broke up.
Conspiracy Theorist:
"There's this car that runs on water, man."
According to Hyde, Steven Spielberg directed a fake moon landing for the government - which "is how he got the job for Jaws 1."
Cool Shades: He is always seen wearing circular shades. He even wears them in dark places. This is partially to hide how often he's stoned.
Cop Hater: As expected from a delinquent, Hyde hates police officers, a trait he shared with his real father.
Deadpan Snarker: He's the king of sarcasm among the group with practically every word that comes out of his mouth to snark at someone.
Don't You Dare Pity Me!: Hates the idea of anyone feeling sorry for him, after his mother abandoned him Eric had a hard time getting him to accept help, it took Red basically forcing him to move in with the Foremans to snap him out of it.
Early-Installment Weirdness: The writers for the show initially had plans for a Hyde-Donna-Eric love triangle, and that dynamic was very clearly present in Season 1. However, plans changed to have Hyde's character revolve around his familial bonds, and hence in future seasons he didn't treat her any different that he did with the guys.
Erudite Stoner: Fits this trope to a T.
Even Bad Men Love Their Mamas: Not for his real mother but to his adopted one. More than anyone else, Kitty can bring out Hyde's softer side. In one episode he's the only person who remembers her birthday.
Everyone Has Standards:
He's tempted but stops himself from stealing jewelry at Beatrice's funeral.
During the period Kelso was cheating on Jackie with Laurie, Hyde repeatedly needled him and set up traps to expose or embarrass him. That amused him, but he absolutely refused to tell Jackie himself, as he sincerely believes friends shouldn't rat on each other. For this particular example, Hyde also chides Donna for giving Eric a hard time for not telling her about any of this and says the guy deserves a break in return for all the things he does for her.
Family of Choice: He's not blood related to the Formans, but he's essentially a surrogate son to Red and Kitty and a surrogate brother to Eric and Laurie. Notably, he’s the only one of Eric’s male friends that shows zero attraction to Laurie and shares Eric's disdain for her.
Forgiven, but Not Forgotten: In the second season episode, "Halloween", Eric learned that Hyde tried to kiss Donna in the first season episode, "Ski Trip". In "Eric's Stash", a few episodes later, though inflamed by Laurie, it's revealed that Eric still resents Hyde for it to the point he blames Hyde for stealing some money from him. It was Red who took the money to buy a new hot water heater.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Melancholic.
Genius Bruiser: He is both the strongest and smartest of his friends.
Happily Adopted: After being abandoned by his parents, the Foremans took Hyde in and he lives with them until the end of the series. Under their care, Hyde's life has improved and in return, he helps out with chores unlike with Eric.
Heroic Comedic Sociopath: Often takes joy in seeing others misfortune or them getting hurt.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Eric.
Hidden Heart of Gold: He's a genuinely good-natured and upstanding guy, but he hates openly displaying it. Being around Kitty and, eventually, Jackie has drawn that side out of him a bit more.
Hilariously Abusive Childhood: "They didn't leave me at the mall. They forgot me. They were drunk." The rest of it, though, is genuinely upsetting and taken seriously.
Jerkass: If anyone can insult someone to that person's face, it's Hyde.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He's mean, insensitive, blunt and aloof but does care for his friends and was eventually a great boyfriend to Jackie when they were dating.
Knight in Sour Armor: Long before they hooked up, Jackie had a crush on Hyde from his defending her. When he beats up a guy who insulted her at Red's barbecue, she sees him as a Knight in Shining Armor, much to his embarrassment and frustration.
Lack of Empathy: He rarely feels compassion or sympathy for others, it's even lampshaded in an episode by Eric.
Ladykiller in Love: Had this dynamic with Jackie.
The Lancer: To Eric's hero. He even dresses up as the the trope image character in one of Eric's Imagine Spots.
Last-Name Basis: He's called Hyde by everybody except Red, Kitty, and Jackie (who started calling him Steven after she got a crush on him).
Lean and Mean: His slim build goes with his sadistic and abrasive Jerkass status.
Meaningful Name: "Hyde" likes to hide his feelings a lot.
Mellow Fellow: Always maintains his laid-back and nonchalant attitude.
Metal Head: Was a 70's variety of this.
Morality Pet: Jackie & Kitty are his, with both of them bringing out the best in him.
For Jackie, he goes to prom and helps her get back with Kelso, takes the fall for the weed at the end of season 2 and defends her when her date (who is just trying to sleep with her then dump her) insults her. And that's before they start dating.
He goes out of his way to be good to Kitty, wishing her happy birthday long after he'd moved out.
My Sister Is Off-Limits: Did not like Kelso fooling around with Angie.
Noble Male, Roguish Male: Roguish to Eric's noble. Zigzagged in later seasons.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: At the end of Season 2, Jackie's about to get busted for holding, so Hyde takes the blame and goes to jail. In the Season 3 premiere, Red kicks him out of the house for this and only relents when Donna explains the whole story. However, Red still gives him a lengthy, angry lecture about everything that went on during this entire ordeal, which overwhelms Hyde.
Only Sane Man: Downplayed. He usually has the most common sense in the group but can sometimes do stuff that will get gang in trouble.
Opposites Attract: He's a smart, dry-witted, cynical Conspiracy Theorist whilst Jackie is a ditzy, rich, loud cheerleader. Gradually deconstructed; their respective differences cause a lot of conflict in their relationship, and they break up and get back together several times. Eventually they break up for good because Jackie wants to know that they have a future together while Hyde feels he is too young to commit to marriage and is more content to live in the moment.
Parental Abandonment: His dad left when he was a kid and his mom was gone by the end of Season 1 - requiring the move-in with the Formans. His dad returned in Season 3 and Hyde moved in with him, but reversed in Season 4. Off-screen, Hyde's parents got back together, but then left him again.
Really Get Around: Not as much as Kelso, but still qualifies as he only has one serious relationship.
Real Men Hate Affection: He denies even having feelings. It ends up causing problems when Jackie needs emotional support in Season 5.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Savvy Guy to Jackie's Energetic Girl. They had this dynamic long before they were together, as depicted in the episode where he teaches her to be "zen" in order to piss Laurie off. She ends up pulling it off so well, he compliments her for the first time in the series, saying she was totally badass.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Manly man to Eric's sensitive guy.
Sequel Non-Entity: Due to his actor's legal troubles, he isn't referred to at all in That '90s Show, nor are any clips of him included in Fez's flashback scene in the season finale.
The Slacker: "Just imagine what I could do if I applied myself. Oh well, guess we'll never know." Jackie tries to break him of this, to no avail. Amusingly, he has had several jobs where HE is the responsible one, as his bosses are usually even lazier than he is, or in Leo's case, can barely remember he owns a business in the first place.
The Snark Knight: He's pretty the Troll with his snarkiness and schadenfreude sense of humor.
The Stoner: He's the source of the gang's stash.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: The Smart Guy to Donna's Strong Girl.
Suddenly Ethnicity: Season 7 reveals that his real father is black.
Sunglasses at Night: Hyde is very rarely seen without his Cool Shades, wearing them even at nightime.
Sympathetic Adulterer: Hyde cheats on Jackie by sleeping with a nurse one time, believing that she cheated on him first with Kelso. He clearly feels terrible after discovering that they really were just talking, taking full accountability for his actions by telling Jackie what he did upon said discovery, unlike Kelso who was a serial cheater and kept her in the dark until she found out anyway. Despite Jackie's justified anger, she eventually forgives Hyde and he never does it again once they rekindle their relationship.
Team Dad: Along with Donna, Hyde is the most mature in the group and tends to act as a big brother figure to his friends and often gives them advice on life.
Technician Versus Performer: With his sister she's been dreaming of taking over her dad's business all her life (to the point that when she was 8 she was disappointed with a pony as a gift) whereas Hyde has no life goals, only took a job managing the record store because he likes music and wanted to spend time with his dad, hates hard work and spends all his time slacking off and smoking weed, however Angie is a Control Freak who freaks out if things don't go exactly according to plan and needs Hyde to improvise.
Tin Man: While he is very aloof and good at keeping his emotions, he can be very passionate.
Token Evil Teammate: While Jackie and Kelso are not nice people, it's mostly because they are too ditzy and immature to know better. Hyde is smart enough to understand what he's doing, but he's still mean and insensitive towards everyone, and his Lack of Empathy is even lampshaded in one episode.
Token Houseguest: Hyde moves in with the Forman family at the end due to his parents leaving him, living in their basement for much of the rest of the show. He even stays with them after Eric leaves.
Took a Level in Kindness: Because his life starts to turn around as well as having several positive influences in his life, Hyde starts to mellow out more.
Toxic Friend Influence: He encourages everyone to make stupid choices and if they try to protest, he mocks them until they give in.
Troubled, but Cute: He is a delinquent with parental abandonment issues but still sleeps around and has a good heart.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With everyone, but especially Eric. They insult each other a great deal, but Hyde goes out of his way to help Eric a few times.
What Does She See in Him?: Eric doesn't understand how Hyde can be attracted to Jackie, whom Eric can't stand. Subverted when Hyde tries to explain his attraction to Jackie to Eric, making Eric realize it's not so much that Jackie isn't hot as much as her attitude is so annoying that it distracts him from her hotness.
With Friends Like These...: He's good at getting the guys in trouble.