All Girls Want Bad Boys: Deconstructed. At first it was downplayed, as she was romantically involved with Dylan. But after they broke up, she began dating actual jerks who didn't treat her with respect. Finally, after getting sick of it, she started to invert the trope.
Ambiguously Bi: Although she has never had a female partner before, once while on vacation she said that whoever they find on the island, weather it was a guy or lady, she’d be kissing it. She also seemingly flirted with homeless car thief Joan. Sarah Hyland had long supported the theory that Haley was truly bisexual and played her with that in mind.
Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: Not to Luke's extent, but she's still very prone to just ignoring things that she isn't immediately interested in.
Bad Influencer: Subverted. At one point, Haley becomes a social media influencer and is hired to promote nightclubs. Phil disapproves of this and tries to steer her towards a more practical career. However, she demonstrates her skill as an influencer to her dad by using social media to sell a house he was having trouble getting people to buy.
Basement Dweller: After getting expelled from college. Phil even warns Luke that he needs to apply himself, because they only have the one basement.
Big-Breast Pride: Implied in "Do Not Push" where she’s shown checking out her large bust in a mirror.
Big Sister Bully: She used to be one to Alex in the show' early days—as part of their former Sibling Rivalry—before maturing into an adult.
Book Dumb: In contrast to her under-performance in school, Haley has proven to be quite the fast thinker.
Brainless Beauty: Played straight most of the time, though she still manages to trick her parents into losing their family's contest in who can go the longest without using computer and phone technology so she could win. She also manages to fool her family into thinking she has a job as a waitress. She also was (briefly) able to teach Alex how to get popular. In short, Haley may be book dumb but she is also fairly creative and socially savvy.
Bratty Teenage Daughter: Initially, she was this. However, as she's gotten older, she's been subverting this and developing into a mature and considerate adult.
Brilliant, but Lazy: "Brilliant" is pushing it, but it's been pointed out that if Haley put the effort and thoughtfulness of her schemes into her schoolwork she'd have done much better in school.
Character Development:
As Haley had gotten older, she's become far more appreciative of her family, especially Phil, Claire and Alex.
She's also become more aware of her own behaviour, and how selfish she was when she was younger, and is greatly trying to be a better person.
Cool Big Sis:
Occasionally. Often in somewhat 'odd' fashion, such as when she carved "Alex Dunphy Do Me" under the bleaches at their school to try and cheer Alex up.
Both she and Alex are this to Lily, which is funny because they're both ten times better sister figures to their adopted cousin than they are to their own younger brother.
She has emerged as this to Alex, offering advice regarding college and boys, and expressing her fears that their relationship would suffer when Alex left for college.
She does care about her younger brother Luke. She was once shown to be able to play a game with him when he was younger and apparently she used to dress Luke for school when he was younger so he would get attention like she used to. Even though she didn’t do anything when Alex tricked him into believing their dads former girlfriend was his real mother, she does seem annoyed at Alex for it.
Daddy's Girl: For all her brattiness, Haley truly cares for her dad and when he punishes her, it hits deeper than when her mother does, as seen in "Party Crasher". Also, like Alex, she gets upset if she makes him cry.
Dating What Daddy Hates:
Inverted with Dylan, whom Phil loves, but Claire can't stand.
Averted with Andy, in that Phil and Claire both greatly approve.
Disappointing Older Sibling: Neither Alex nor Luke think highly of their older sibling, and the former is often in odds of her most of the time.
The Ditz: Although she gradually subverts this as the show goes on, there are still plenty of moments where Haley proves herself to be a bit of an airhead. She misunderstands simple concepts, has a tendency towards Comically Missing the Point, and is probably the character most frequently outwitted or tricked.
Dude Magnet: A lot of guys are attracted to her. Dylan, David, Ethan, Andy, Charlie, Arvin, Rainer Shine, etc.
Even the Girls Want Her: In "Express Yourself", a drunk girl calls Haley pretty and makes out with her.
Everyone Can See It:
Her mutual attraction to Andy. They do eventually admit how they feel after a fashion, but still aren't together due to various self-imposed obstacles, and continue to deny they feel anything more than friendship toward one another when asked by anyone else.
Also, they are the only ones who seem oblivious to the fact that they're basically a Generation Xerox of Claire and Phil.
Everyone Has Standards: She was rather put off by Alex lying to Luke about him being adopted just because of a minor insult.
Future Loser: Haley is the butt of a lot of jokes that involve this after she gets kicked out of college and has to move back in with her parents.
Generation Xerox: It's brought up that Haley acts just like Claire did when she was teenager. Comes full circle in season 5 where Haley develops feelings for Andy, who is very similar to Phil.
The Glorious War of Sisterly Rivalry: With Alex. Haley is the pretty one, Alex the smart one (Many viewers feel that Alex wins hands-down, because Hayley is beautiful, while Alex is smart AND beautiful. Although, In-Universe, Alex is treated by her family and herself as being less attractive than Haley and getting no dates, despite being a beautiful girl who attracts many guys, even if a lot of her admirers are nerds).
Hard-Drinking Party Girl: While it's mostly kept offscreen, it's implied that she's spending most of her time partying, drinking, smoking weed and otherwise having a wild time, in contrast to Alex. When she goes to a bar at 21 for her "first drink", she's got an entire wallet full of fake I Ds, and has to unconvincing act like she's not used to alcohol.
Hidden Depths:
In "See You Next Fall", Haley talks Alex out of her mean-spirited middle-school graduation speech by admitting that she is actually very anxious about whether she'll graduate from high school with her own class or not.
Although not as clever as her younger sister, Haley does have flashes of brilliance, especially when it comes to the social realm.
She's also very informed in the intellectual areas she considers important - she's a skilled photographer, and is able to effortlessly critique a woman's outfit to high-end fashion standards.
I Have Boobs, You Must Obey!: Haley's fully aware of how easy it is for her to convince men to do what she wants with her good looks, often seeming outright confused when it doesn't work.
It's All About Me: Especially early in the show Haley tends to combine this attitude with Never My Fault. She'll disregards other people's rules, requests or wishes just so she can do whatever she wants — and when she's inevitably found out, she doesn't even fathom why they're angry, treating them as the unfair and unreasonable party when it could not be clearer that the entire fault is hers. She gets over it as the seasons pass, beginning to take more responsibility, but she'll still have moments where she just does what she wants with no thought to the consequences or to anyone else.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: In the earlier seasons, where she was a stuck-up Bratty Teenage Daughter and Big Sister Bully. Despite her occasional mean streak, she has consideration for others' feelings.
Lethal Chef: When Haley tries to make cupcakes for school they turn out impossibly inedible.
Claire: Where's the number for poison control?
Phil: I love you, Claire! I've always loved you!
Luke: Mom? My mouth's asleep, like at the dentist.
Ms. Fanservice: Moreso after her actress, Sarah Hyland, grows up. Haley is a young, beautiful woman who wears attractive clothes.
Proud Beauty: Attractive as hell, and she knows it.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Starts to follow this after meeting Nice Guy Andy Bailey and getting sick of the "bad boys" she dated after Dylan.
The Social Expert: Haley might have the Book Smarts and practical skills of a bag of hammers, but she knows people, and she's easily the most adept member of the family at manipulating, convincing or deceiving people. After high school she uses her good looks and social skills to promote clubs on social media to the tune of $500 a night.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: According to her parents, Haley was actually much sweeter and more affectionate as a child. When she was a little girl, she would always hug Phil whenever he came home from work, and was very close to her mother. When she became a teenager, however, she grew very distant from her parents, and started to act rebellious and cagey around them.
What Beautiful Eyes!: A defining trait for Haley. So much so, that Gavin Sinclair describes her as having "the face of a cartoon lamb."
Women Drivers: Haley is a completely incompetent driver when she first gets her learner's permit. At one point she ends up driving through a park.