Adorably Precocious Child: He's incredibly intellectual and sophisticated for a ten year old. Admittedly, the "precocious" part does bother the adults and doesn't earn him a ton of friends.
Berserk Button: The normally level-headed and mature Manny takes another guy’s cell phone and breaks it when said guy insulted a particular film that Manny holds dear to his heart: Mary Poppins. This was after warning Jay that it’s not worth it to give into anger, but is quick to drop this after overhearing another guy degraded Mary Poppins.
Big Brother Instinct: Lectures his parents on not arguing will cause harm to Joe, when Gloria is still pregnant with him. After Joe is born, Manny didn't like how Claire was drinking while watching his baby brother and stated as such.
Camp Straight: Manny is The Dandy, a cultured sophisticate and openly emotional, and also has hit on basically every female character he's come into contact with. He's fully Mistaken for Gay in one episode, with Cam and Mitch wondering if he's going through the same thing they did.
Casanova Wannabe: Throughout all the Modern Family seasons, Manny has not been afraid to show his affection towards his crushes, but he gets rejected a lot. Especially when he was a kid and had a tendency to get crushes on teenage girls or even adult women (he had as much luck as you’d expect).
Character Development: At the beginning of the series he could be pretty obnoxious (but in all fairness, he WAS 10 years old at the time - acting his actual age at certain moments), but his arrogance and vanity has been toned down enough for him to gain better relationships with others.
Creepy Uncle: Sort of. He had a crush on Haley and at one point Alex, who are technically his nieces. Of course, they're only related by marriage, close to the same age, and did not grow up together so how creepy Manny is will vary. It's also largely worn off as Manny's expressed interest in many other girls.
The Dandy: He cares immensely about his appearance, and Claire remarks that he "dresses like a count".
Fat and Skinny: The Fat to his best friend Luke's Skinny.
In Love with Love: He flirts with so many girls because he wants to find true love.
Incest-ant Admirer: Downplayed, and much lighter than most instances of this trope, but he's expressed attraction to both his step-nieces at various points. He thinks it's ok because they're Not Blood Siblings, they and the rest of the family disagree. He's stopped this as he's got more mature.
Insufferable Genius: Manny is kind but he is also very arrogant. His pride is his greatest flaw, and he has a hard time dealing with people being smarter than he is.
Intelligence Equals Isolation: Many of his peers find his maturity incredibly annoying.
In Touch with His Feminine Side: Manny is open with his feelings and is quite the sophisticated romantic. Plus, he loves baking.
Ironic Name: Perhaps unintentionally, but his last name means "skinny" or "thin" in Spanish. Although the actor has lost weight in recent years, he is still the "Fat" to Luke's "Skinny".
Kid-anova: Seems to have a different crush every episode.
Little Professor Dialog: His vocabulary is incredibly impressive.
Momma's Boy: His support is mainly channeled through his mother.
No Social Skills: Manny is extroverted, but seems to have very little understanding of what's appropriate behaviour and sees no need to hide his emotions. His behaviour, especially his attempts to be charming, frequently making people uncomfortable or drives people away
Overly Long Name: At one point he wants to take French, as he thinks it would be a "better fit" for him than Spanish.
Gloria: Your name is Manuel Alberto Javier Alejandro Delgado. How is French a better fit for you?
Manny: Okay, I'm pretty sure you threw in a name I've never heard before.
Precocious Crush: He has a few crushes on a lot of older girls and women in the early seasons, including several of Joe's nannies. This warred off as he got more mature and older.
Princely Young Man: Carries himself as such despite a poor upbringing - he's The Dandy with a taste for fine things, and talks in a sophisticated and cultured manner even as a child. Jay and Gloria have sometimes brought up the contrast.
Manny: A lot of amenities vanish when a H becomes an M.
Jay: When I met you, you were eating ceral out of a bucket.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The Sensitive Guy to Luke's Manly Man.
Serial Romeo: Manny isn't afraid to take chances, leading him to ask out older girls, and develop somewhat of a crush on Haley.
Small Name, Big Ego: He does tend to think he's more of a popular figure than he really is at school. Best summed up when he does a huge speech to his class at a dance on how he knows they look up to him...only to be told no one there has any idea who he is.
Manny: I know you all think of me as the golden boy, the prodigy, the wunderkind...
Classmate: Who are you?
Troubling Unchildlike Behavior: Many people are weirded out by how adult he acts.
Vocal Evolution: Not as deep as Luke's, but Manny's voice gets much deeper by the show's final season.
Weight Woe: Hardly, but as a preteen he's nervous about showering around other kids his age.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Snakes are to Indiana Jones as butterflies are Manny Delgado.
Wise Beyond Their Years: He is very mature, cultured and intuitive for his age and is often shown doing adult-like things, such as having conversations with Claire about her marriage and kids, drinking coffee* and handling problems like a man.