Afraid of Clowns: "Fizbo" reveals that he's deeply uncomfortable with clowns, which is caused by how he once accidentally found a dead clown in the woods as a child.
Aging Would-Be Hipster: Phil tries to be the "cool" dad to his three kids by staying hip to modern pop culture. He doesn't do very well — he thinks WTF means "why the face" — mostly earning eye rolls from his two older daughters. His youngest son Luke, however, is more impressionable, at least at first.
Amazon Chaser: As he stated in one of his private cams, although it seems that it's not just confidence and strength that he's attracted to:
Phil: I'll admit it. I'm turned on by powerful women. Michelle Obama, Oprah, Condoleezza Rice, Serena Williams...Wait a minute.
Ambiguously Bi: Played for Laughs via his numerous man-crushes (including Haley's on-off boyfriend Dylan, weatherman Rainer Shine, and various other men), his numerous 'feminine' hobbies, and this little gem of a conversation with Mitchell during a hectic drive to the airport: 
Phil: Must be a lot easier just living with a guy. Yeah, life would be simpler if I was gay.
Mitchell: Do you think you could get in the fast lane?
Phil: Oh I could totally get in the fast lane.
Mitchell: I meant the road...
Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: Phil gets distracted very easily. "Starry Night" all but says point-blank that he has undiagnosed ADHD, as Alex listing off the symptoms is intercut with Phil demonstrating them.
Berserk Button: He's not a jealous guy, but he has his one rule when it comes to Claire: He’s the only one who makes her laugh. He acts like a Crazy Jealous Guy if another man does it.
Beware the Nice Ones:
Even Phil has his limits, and when he's pushed to those limits, he gets RESULTS. When he realizes that Alex and Haley are taking advantage of his pushover tendencies to get out of doing chores, he snaps so hard that Claire has to step in.
Phil: YOU POKED THE BEAR, GIRLS!
Starting in later seasons, he's more apt to discipline and scold the kids when they screw up. He really lets Haley have it when she gets expelled from college.
In season 6, another crass comment from Gil Thorpe about Claire, combined with a near-miss in the car that morning, has Phil finally lose his patience with Thorpe and confront him head-on.
Phil: Oh by the way, if you ever speak disrespectfully again about my wife, I'll kill you. [beat] Sorry, that sounded like a joke. I will actually kill you.
Big Ol' Eyebrows: Has big eyebrows.
Bumbling Dad: He may be more of a deconstruction of the trope than a proper Bumbling Dad. In some ways, he's certainly bumbling - he's a goofy Manchild who is often mothered by his wife. But he has few other glaring flaws and is genuinely helpful and supportive. Although goofy and often somewhat stupid, he's not actually incompetent. He also does allow for Claire to be the disciplinarian and rule-maker the majority of the time, but it's acknowledged both by him and the narrative that it's an accepted role. When things get really difficult he's fully capable of being an authoritative presence. And while his daughters often behave as though they don't respect him, they've shown many times that they care a great deal what he thinks of them and want him to have a good opinion of them.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: In most areas of his life, Phil's a goofy dumbass who's constantly messing up even everyday things. In the area of real estate, he's a borderline Genius Ditz, showing impressive cunning and knowledge whenever it comes to selling.
Butt-Monkey: Very much so. His own family (including his wife and kids) constantly belittle him, take advantage of him and everyone walks all over him consistently because of his laid-back, Nice Guy demeanor. Although he does stand up for himself sometimes.
Character Development: Later seasons have him more ready to discipline his kids when they get out of line.
Chivalrous Pervert: He may be unable to hide his views on how attractive Gloria is or stop his occasional ogling of other women, but refuses to commit adultery because he truly loves Claire.
Cloudcuckoolander: Phil is generally goofy and often doesn't plan things through. His more outlandish endeavors—compulsively buying a pet emu, running a miniature village for baby ducks, etc.—are constant subjects of confusion from his family.
Clueless Chick-Magnet: He seems unaware of it, but he unwittingly turns a number of people on throughout the series: horny ex-girlfriends, horny divorcees, gay men...
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Best demonstrated in "Fulgencio," which follows his efforts to help with his children's problems whilst they all believe him incapable. He manages to do so flawlessly, complete with a Godfather-esque montage.
Dark and Troubled Past: At one point he came across the body of a dead clown, which traumatised him and gave him a lifelong fear of them.
Deadpan Snarker: Not often because of his overly-friendly personality, but when he's annoyed, he shows the capability.
Luke: It's called growing up and having your own interests, like the minister's daughter in your precious Footloose.
Phil: Wow, using my own movie against me. Let's hear it for the boy.
Drama Queen: When he gets upset, he will often go into a melodramatic funk.
Even the Guys Want Him: A number of gay men have found him attractive, including Cam, much to his own surprise.
Genius Ditz:
He is shown in "Fifteen Percent" to be competent with technology to a far greater extent than his wife or father-in-law.
He's also very knowledgeable in property laws, as demonstrated in "Promposal". When Aunt Alice refuses to stop selling her knockoff of Gloria's hot sauce, Phil convinces her by threatening to report the illegal structures on her property.
Considering the lifestyle the Dunphys lead (large house in the Los Angeles suburbs, lavish vacations once a year, the various projects that Phil gets engrossed in) and that Claire had been a stay at home mom for years, he is clearly a wildly successful real estate agent.
Good Cop/Bad Cop: As far as parenting goes, the good cop to Claire's bad cop. In the one episode where they switched roles, he was terrifying as a bad cop, even commenting that he felt "shaky" afterward and wanted to go back to being the good cop.
Gosh Darn It to Heck!: Phil rarely ever curses, instead shouting things like "Sweet and sour CHICKEN!", "Son of a MITCHELL!" and "Son of Jor-El!" when angry, frightened, or in pain.
Happily Married: While he does find Claire nagging and controlling on occasion, Phil deeply loves her.
Innocently Insensitive: He often accidentally insults his wife, either just by not defending her when someone else insults her, or by making comments about how she used to be hotter than she is now. Claire isn't exactly happy with it, but knows he doesn't mean anything. He only does it out of childish obliviousness rather than maliciousness.
Intergenerational Friendship: With Dylan, Haley’s on-again, off-again boyfriend.
In Touch with His Feminine Side: Phil is very needy and emotional, much to his father-in-law's annoyance. He also has several "feminine" hobbies (for instance, he was a cheerleader in college), and several scenes have shown him immediately making friends with groups of women he's never met before.
Keet: Phil acts like a hyperactive child.
Kindhearted Simpleton: He's nice, but he's not very bright, so he usually makes things worse trying to fix them.
Let Her Grow Up, Dear: He has a much harder time learning that Haley isn't a virgin, while Claire is pretty relaxed. Of course, he is more upset because it means that Haley is growing up. He has a similar reaction when Alex let's slip that she isn't a virgin as well.
Manchild: Though he's a genuine sweetheart, Phil is also hyperactive and easily distracted. Claire generally refers to him as "the kid she's married to."
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: The latter when compared to Claire. He tends to be more open-minded and even has traditional feminine hobbies (i.e. cheerleading).
Mistaken for Gay: On the episode where Billy Dee Williams appears As Himself, Jay says "you're in my gay son's favorite movie!" (Brian's Song). When Phil gets excited at the prospect of meeting Lando, Williams assumes he is that gay son.
Mr. Fanservice: He certainly gets his fair share of shirtless scenes, as well as scenes where he's in his tighty-whities. "The Day We Almost Died" even features a scene of him in a sleeveless shirt, pouring water on himself to cool off—to Cam's awe.
Nice Guy: One of the nicest people you could ever wish to meet.
Odd Friendship: With Dylan, Haley's on-again, off-again boyfriend. Odd in that he’s old enough to be Dylan’s dad.
OOC Is Serious Business: Compared to his wife, Phil is very much a relaxed, free-spirited parent who very rarely gets upset with his kids regardless of what screwups they're responsible for. However, when Haley gets arrested at college and subsequently refuses to take any blame for her actions, Phil angrily puts his foot down, pointing out how Hayley was more than aware of what was happening at the party she was at, and expressing disgust at her decision to avoid taking her arrest and hearing before the school board seriously, as well as not considering what he and the rest of the family have had to done for her, which leaves Claire in an awed state of silence.
Also unlike Claire, Phil fears confrontation, so people tend to walk all over him. But after surviving a near collision and coming to terms with his own mortality, he confidently marches up to a rival realtor who just that morning had poached his clients and made objectifying comments about his wife, telling them what a skeezy loser the man is before telling him in no uncertain terms that if he ever disrespects Claire again, he'll kill him.
Papa Wolf: As bumbling as he is, he will get serious if you hurt any of his kids.
Phrase Catcher: In times of stress, "What's the plan, Phil?" is often exclaimed by his family members.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The Sensitive Guy to Jay's Manly Man. Whereas Jay is resistant to the very idea of opening up to anyone, Phil is a highly empathetic person.
Shotgun Wedding: It's eventually revealed that he and Claire decided to get married after learning she was pregnant with Haley.
Totally Radical: Part of Phil's "cool dad" schtick which he refers to as "peerenting", which is a combination of "talking like a peer, but acting like a parent".
Phil: I'm the cool dad, that's my thing. I'm hip, I surf the web, I text. "LOL", Laugh Out Loud, "OMG", Oh My God, "WTF", Why The Face. Uhm, you know. I know all the dances to High School Musical.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: Not to his old man (with whom he gets along rather well), but to Jay. Since the latter was never pleased with his marriage to Claire, Phil tries desperately to impress him.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Phil suffers from coulrophobia, intense fear of clowns. This was revealed in the episode "Fizbo", when Cameron came to Luke's birthday party dressed as a clown. He has addressed this and says that his mother thinks the fear originated from him finding a dead clown in the woods one day when he was little.