Action Survivor: When he first starts facing dangerous situations on his own his first impulse is to bolt ("Nor the Battle to the Strong") or freeze ("Shattered Mirror"), as it probably would be for most of us. In time he develops into someone who can take decisive action in small doses — he rescues his father from a Pah-Wraith worshipper at the top of Season 7 — but he always remains a non-confrontational character.
The Artifact: After how badly Wesley Crusher was received, Jake was conceived as the anti-Wesley (a perfectly normal child), and it was his friend, recurring character Nog, who would join Starfleet. But it meant that in the later seasons, as he grew up and the Dominion War was underway, Jake had very little to do while Nog, among other recurring characters, got more to do.
Birthday Buddies: When discussing the redshirts that died in "The Ship", Benjamin Sisko says that Enrique Muniz shared a birthday with Jake.
Black and Nerdy: Writing is pretty nerdy given all the research inherent in the job.
Break the Cutie: "Nor the Battle to the Strong." Up until this episode, Jake's always had his father around when things have gotten tough, but he's suddenly thrust into the middle of a violent and bloody war and ends up on his own. Needless to say, he doesn't take it too well.
Contrasting Sequel Main Character: To Wesley Crusher from Star Trek: The Next Generation. Both are children of Starfleet officers (Dr. Beverly Crusher and Commander/Captain Benjamin Sisko) who grow up in space and whose growth are shown throughout the series are shown, both of whom lost a parent as a result of Captain Jean-Luc Picard (Wesley's father died on an away mission while serving under Picard, while Jake's mother died during the Battle of Wolf 359 while Picard was assimilated into the Borg). Both differ from one another in many key areas. Wesley dreams of becoming a Starfleet officer, while Jake is content to pursue a career in writing. Wesley traveled throughout space aboard the Enterprise, while Jake mostly stayed on Deep Space 9. In addition, Wesley was oft stated to have hidden potential that made him very special, while Jake is just an ordinary kid (albeit a seemingly talented writer).
A Day in the Limelight: In the Season 5 episodes "Nor The Battle For The Strong" and "In The Cards".
Didn't Think This Through: No, not staying behind on Deep Space Nine during the Dominion occupation, as he reasoned that being the Emissary's son would protect him and he was proven right — but he honestly believed Weyoun would let him send his articles describing the truth of the Dominion's occupation to the Federation News Service, which rather defeats the purpose of staying behind to begin with. He's able to get Morn to smuggle them out by including them with Morn's frequent mail to his mother. It's later mentioned that Jake collects his articles about the occupation in a book after the Federation retakes the station.
Dirty Coward: "Nor the Battle to the Strong" deconstructs this idea. At first, Jake is contemptuous of a soldier who shoots himself in the foot to get out of the battle, but then he realizes just how powerful fear can be when he's caught in battle himself and abandons Bashir. That said, civilians like him are not expected to courageously run towards the sound of phaser fire, while that Federation soldier is.
Going for the Big Scoop: Sensibly, Jake decides that if he were to miss his shot in covering the Dominion occupation of Bajor, he will never hack it as a serious journalist. (It doesn't exactly ease the blow on his grandad, though.) He banks on the fact that the Dominion won't want to upset the Bajorans by hurting the Emissary's son, although he knows it's a pretty risky bet. It pays off: Weyoun is far too conscious of public relations to harm an adolescent boy (and realizes Jake's value as a potential bargaining chip in case of attack), and he actually develops a sort of fondness for the clingy newsie—like a pet. However, Weyoun doesn't actually allow any of Jake's stories to be published.
Likes Older Women: A large number of his romances end up this way, including one with a Dabo girl four years his senior.
The Matchmaker: He sets up his dad with Kasidy.
Military Brat: By the time of the first episode, young Jake is pretty tired of not having a permanent place to call home and impermanent friends.
Most Writers Are Writers: The crew was not particularly happy with "The Muse," especially when they realized Jake's plotline was the sort that would only really be compelling to fellow writers.
Only Sane Man: In "Valiant," he is the only one who thinks that Cadet Watters and the rest of Red Squad should not be commanding a warship on a clandestine mission, and that they really shouldn't go after a Dominion battleship that can overpower a Galaxy-class ship. He is one hundred percent correct.
The Pollyanna: He's worse than Bashir in that regard. During the Dominion Occupation of DS9, Jake is honestly surprised when Weyoun refuses to send his articles to the Federation News Service after they paint the Dominion in an unflattering light (i.e. as an expansionist, totalitarian empire). After he still doesn't get it, Jake asks, what about the freedom of the press? This naturally causes Weyoun to laugh!.
Positive Friend Influence: To Nog, helping him grow from illiterate troublemaker to gung-ho Starfleet officer.
Practically Different Generations: He's around twenty by the end of the series, while his stepmother is pregnant.
Strong Family Resemblance: Season Seven Jake is even taller than his pop, and he's getting the same hairline as well.
Supreme Chef: When he's not Going for the Big Scoop, he's cooking Chicken a la Sisko just as well as his old man. And his old man. He definitely inherited the "cooking gene".
Tagalong Kid: This became unintentionally hilarious in the later seasons, as Lofton ended up being one of the tallest actors. For example, the episode "Valiant" has a crew full of cadets who barely reach his neck trying to order him around. They have to look up to point a phaser to his chin!
Those Two Guys: Himself and Nog, who considered him to be a pest initially. The pair were roughly the same age, and grew up together.
Jake: You always used to chase me away.
Odo: I never chased you away, I chased Nog. You just happened to be with him.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: Subverted, as he doesn't want to follow his father into Starfleet and worries that his father will be disappointed with his desire to be a writer.