Admiring the Abomination: In "Babel", as much as he also tries to cure the engineered virus, he also gets a little too excited for Sisko's liking, and calls it a work of genius.
Adult Sleeps with Stuffed Toy: Several episodes mention that he has a teddy bear, which Leeta borrows to sleep with.
Ambiguously Bi: Is a Casanova Wannabe around women, and his acted-intentionally Homoerotic Subtext with Garak is on the same level as Kirk/Spock and Q/Picard. Word of God eventually confirmed the two were in a relationship.
Ambiguously Brown: Though the name is clearly Arabic, nobody ever mentions where Bashir hails from - a fact which Siddig was personally proud of. When his parents turn up at the station, his mother Amsha speaks with Fadwa El Guindi's Egyptian accent, while his dad Richard is distinctly Cockney. The same is true of Siddig himself (his mother is English, his father is Sudanese).
Badass Bookworm: He usually goes out of his way to avoid violence, and clearly has little stomach for it, but on the rare occasions when he is dragged into a fight or otherwise dive into danger he usually performs tremendously better than you'd suspect just by looking at him. Then again, he is an Augment.
Bash Brothers: With O'Brien in some episodes, Garak in others.
In "Indiscretion", it was mentioned that it's frowned upon on Cardassia for outsiders (and especially non-Cardassians) to view a dead relative's body. And yet in "By Inferno's Light", Garak allows Bashir into the room where his father is dying, lying to him that there's no one else in the room. It shows how strongly Garak felt about his and Bashir's friendship.
The B Grade: He lost valedictorian of his class based on one stupid mistake regarding biology terms with vaguely similar sounding names. Rather than being a source of angst, he actually said it was a relief because rather than being on a top-level starship he had a pick of more remote and, in his words, frontier level postings. He later claims to have made the mistake on purpose for that reason, and there is other implications he aimed to not do perfectly in order to throw off suspicion on his history.
Beneath the Mask: He comes off as egotistical with little cause, but after it's revealed he's an Augment Bashir reveals a stunning amount of self-loathing and impostor syndrome underneath the surface.
Bio-Augmentation: Not by choice, and kept secret for most of the series. Bashir is a unique case, however, in that his parents went for a limited, specifically targeted, augmentation to bring a below-average child up to mere genius levels rather than the whole packagenote , meaning that he doesn't demonstrate the extreme personality quirks or dangerous amounts of ambition seen in other augments.
Bolivian Army Ending: Some of his favorite holosuite programs are the Battle of Britain, the Alamo, and the Battle of Thermopylae. Ezri teasingly speculates about these "annihilation fantasies."
Casanova Wannabe: His attempts to be suave always fail, unless he's in a holosuite. He's not nearly as cool as he thinks he is.
Cerebus Retcon: The revelation about his genetic enhancements casts a much darker light on his earlier behavior.
Character Development: Siddig has revealed that he deliberately played Bashir as an absolute twit in the early episodes, wanting to leave room to develop the character on what the Star Trek brand would undoubtedly make a long-running series. This paid off quite well.
Combat Medic: Holy cow, the medic just stabbed his captor in the neck! Justified, given the stakes, but somewhat unexpected.
Gives a good showing of himself in "The Siege of AR-558" and "Rocks and Shoals", and manages to come out of a brawl with a dozen TOS-era Klingons unscathed, as well.
Companion Cube: His teddy bear, Kukalaka.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: In the beginning, when he’s an Upper-Class Twit and Casanova Wannabe, except when he’s working, and he shifts from idiot to Determined Doctor.
Deliberate Under-Performance: In season one, Doctor Bashir admits that he intentionally missed a question on his final exam at the Academy, which dropped him to second in his class. A season five episode reveals that he underperformed to avoid drawing attention to his superior brainpower, which is the result of illegal Bio-Augmentation.
Determined Doctor: Bashir exemplifies this trope more than any other Star Trek doctor character, by far. Here are just a few examples:
The Wire: Refusing to give up on Garak, despite Garak being a Jerkass the whole time.
Hippocratic Oath: Becoming obsessed with helping the Jem'Hadar break their dependence on ketrecel-white, to the point that O'Brien has to sabotage his research to snap him out of it.
The Quckening: Helping a dying pregnant woman stay alive just long enough for her baby to be born, and accidentally inoculating that baby against the disease all in this society are born with and die from.
Dogged Nice Guy: Towards Dax. It doesn't work with Jadzia. Does with Ezri (who he is not dogged with, but she reveals that Jadzia would have reciprocated if Worf hadn't arrived when he did). Although by the time Worf arrived, he'd matured considerably.
Endearingly Dorky: His very first line is tripping all over himself to ask Dax for dinner or drinks.
Establishing Character Moment: While he’s a bit of an Upper-Class Twit early on, when it’s time to do some actual doctoring, he's as forceful, determined, and just plain good as Leonard "Bones" McCoy and Beverly Crusher.
Fan of the Past: Bashir is a huge geek about 1960s spy fiction and something of a war history buff. He is less interested in the 2000s, however (he's a doctor, not a historian), and is so useless at figuring out 23rd Century technology that he and O'Brien stand in a turbolift for ages until a yeoman does it for them.
Fantastic Racism: His genetic augmentation nearly got him kicked out of Starfleet when they found out. The Federation has strict, almost draconian, laws against it due to augments suffering from physical and mental side effects so severe that they cannot be left unsupervised. Not to mention the stigma likely attached to it by the Eugenics War and one Khan Noonien Singh. Sisko mentions that Bashir is the first case they've dealt with in decades, making this a very rare occurrence indeed. Sisko also pointed out that the law is somewhat dated simply because it is so rarely enforced.
Fish Out of Water: Bashir exists solely to contrast the cushiness of TNG with the cold realities of frontier life. Ironically, he's the only crew member who requested the assignment.
For Science!: A dark example would be his attempts to cure the Blight - a designer virus inflicted on dissidents in Dominion space - single-handedly. The debacle finally ended with Bashir gerryrigging a vaccine, promising that the virus would run its course within a generation. However, it came at the cost of several patients experiencing agonizing deaths in place of the euthanasia they had originally opted for.
Worse yet, the Romulans later express an interest in researching the Blight for their own purposes. As they're now allies of the Federation. Bashir might have had little choice but to placate them...
Foreshadowing: A throwaway moment occurs in the Season 4 episode "Homefront", when Odo chats with O'Brien and Bashir right before a trip to Earth. O'Brien cheerfully asks Odo to say hi to O'Brien's parents in Dublin. Odo turns and asks Bashir if he has any family he'd like Odo to visit; Bashir immediately clams up and changes the subject, a hint at his strained relationship with his parents almost a full season before it's explicitly established. Also, at one point he also mentions defeating a Vulcan scientist at squash at his previous post. It seems like a throwaway line, but then you remember Vulcans are 3 times stronger than humans with much faster reflexes (in another episode, Sisko mentions breaking one arm and a few ribs attempting to challenge a Vulcan in a similar sports contest). There's also Bashir's story about losing out on being top of his class because of his confusion of a preganglionic fiber with a postganglionic nerve, something any medical student should easily be able to tell apart. It's hinted a few times that he deliberately failed this exam question to throw off suspicion.
Ironically, Bashir’s genetic enhancements weren’t planned at all prior to "Dr Bashir, I Presume?"—it just happened to work well with previous throwaway moments.
Frontier Doctor: The first since Dr. McCoy. Bashir explicitly came to Bajor because no one else would. He knew that prestige awaited him on the outer rim, and by dumb luck, he spearheaded the research excursions into the Gamma Quadrant. Pretty soon he's the envy of the medical corps. He learns pretty quickly complements of Major Kira that the locals don't exactly appreciate their homeworld being described as "the Wilderness" to their faces though.
Genre Savvy: At least in regards to James Bond novels.
Good Counterpart: To Khan Noonien Singh and his genetically engineered followers. Bashir eventually assembles a few Augment groupies of his own, but with a different purpose: to dampen their antisocial tendencies and reassimilate them into society.
Good Is Not Soft: He believes in the ideals of the Federation, but is willing to use Romulan mind probes to save Odo from the Section 31 virus. He's also a dedicated doctor, but won't hesitate to pick up a phaser to protect his friends and country.
Good with Numbers: He's able to do very complex calculations in his head. Siddig was wary of becoming the show's "Data", so he doesn't show off this talent much.
Have You Tried Not Being a Monster??: How some feel about his augmentations. Julian apparently took it to heart, as he's allowed his personal life and career to fall to shambles, too afraid to attract attention.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: Julian claims that Miles likes him more than Miles loves Keiko. Although Miles would like to deny this, he does admit to sometimes wishing that Keiko was more like Julian.
His Own Worst Enemy: His life shows a pattern of self sabotage. In "Armageddon Game", for example, he tells O'Brien that he turned down a good career and a beautiful French ballerina in favor of Starfleet, but he seems baffled by his own decision. This is explained with the revelation of his discomfort and self-loathing over his genetic augmentations.
Hospital Hottie: While only rarely played for Fanservice, Bashir is an attractive man. He still manages to bungle his relationships with the fairer sex due to overconfidence and inexperience.
Hypocrite: Bashir criticizes the unseen Captain Boday for being an opinionated and arrogant womanizer. He himself is very much a Casanova Wannabe and is rather arrogant himself, especially in the first season where he's characterized as an Upper-Class Twit.
Innocently Insensitive: Goes on to Kira, not knowing that this is her home, about the wonders of being a frontier doctor “out in the wilderness”.
Insufferable Genius: He tends to brag about beating a Vulcan in a racquetball match and his many medical miracles. Ironically, this is toned down after his augmentation is revealed.
In "Crossover", Kira finds herself trapped in a Runabout with Bashir, who keeps ruining her attempts to meditate. Bashir offers to let bygones be bygones by playing some music. Kira begs off, claiming she only knows Bajoran music. He makes his selecton, prompting Kira's incredulous reaction: he knows Bajoran classical composers.
Siddig has revealed that he deliberately made Bashir jerkish because he knew the show would run for years and he wanted to show Character Development. This turned out to fit well with the later idea that it's because of his genetically enhanced origins.
The Intern: He relocates to Bajor in order to make a name for himself legitimately, but still complains about missing out on the action aboard Galaxy-class science vessels. Tellingly, he was caught poking around the Enterprise's laboratory without permission.
Ironic Fear: He was terrified of Doctors growing up. This makes more sense in light of being an Augment.
The Medic: Even if it doesn't make any sense for a station doctor to be out in the field. Or in Ops. Or brought to a firefight. Or...
Multiple-Choice Past: His reasons for going into medicine change from person to person. This is one of the reasons people thought the writers planned the reveal of his augmentations from the beginning, instead of a last-minute change.
Never Tell Me the Odds!: Garak suggests he isn't genetically engineered but a Vulcan when he calculates the ludicrously pessimistic likelihood about them losing the war (a 32.7% of survival – even Quark would fold at those odds).
Nice Guy: To Garak's consternation, Bashir is a kind, compassionate soul who takes his duties as a doctor seriously and does everything in his power to save his patients.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Unsatisfied with the audiences' response to "bumbling" Bashir, the writers outed him as a genetically-enhanced über genius who has been operating under the radar.
Odd Couple: He has an unerring knack for irritating O'Brien. Rather brilliantly, he never did anything that could quite be construed as offensive, but rather gets under the skin in subtle ways: reading off his lists of accomplishments with faux modesty, mincing and preening before their racquetball match ("This exercise for example, I picked up at a tournament from a top player!"), refusing to shut up during a long voyage, and suggesting that the Chief is, well... of a certain age.
Odd Friendship: With Garak. The creepy tailor seems to have made it his personal mission to corrupt the wide-eyed Doctor, and takes delight whenever Bashir exhibits Cardassian-like behavior (such as his detached willingness to shoot Garak in the back in "Our Man Bashir").
With Miles O'Brien. The pair are a decade apart in age. Julian is a doctor, and is career military. Miles is an enlisted officer and stricly an engineer. After a prickly couple of seasons, the pair become practically inseparable.
Open Mouth, Insert Foot: Particularly prone to this in the early seasons, such as his "frontier medicine" comments to Kira, everything he does while flirting with Jadzia, etc.
Pretty Boy: One of the youngest on the station barring children, with a soft face, big eyes, long lashes and a cute puppy smile.
Pro-Human Transhuman: Despite being a genetically enhanced augment, he defies the stereotype and is actually a very nice and caring guy.
Prophetic Name: The meaning of the name Bashir is "well-educated; wise".
Originally, the character was meant to be a Latin Lover named "Dr. Amaros", which is a bit on the nose.
Rank Up: Went unremarked so it may have been a wardrobe error that stuck, but he started the series wearing one gold pip and one black pip (a lieutenant junior grade) and ended with two gold pips (full lieutenant).
Romantic Runner-Up: Twice. The first time was to Rom and the second time was to Worf. If Worf hadn't come along, it's apparent that Dax would have succumbed to his advances (and indeed Ezri admits as much in Season 7).
Satellite Character: Nope, not O'Brien. To Garak. Without his spy intrigue, Bashir wouldn't be included in some of the more interesting arcs (including Section 31).
Small Name, Big Ego: Bashir comes across as a bit of an ass at first, which fits with the viewers' first impressions of the character. Kira seems to barely tolerate him, O'Brien dislikes the limey on principle (as dyed-in-the-wool Irishmen would), Dax nods at his professions of love in a patronising way, and it's clear that Sisko isn't overly fond of his doctor, either. In "Past Prologue", he doesn't seem alarmed by Bashir's collusion with an ex-Cardassian spy, as if doubting that Bashir could cause any risk to Federation security even if he set his mind to it.
Super Loser: Genius-level intellect! Superhuman reflexes! ...But he's rubbish at pulling girls.
Super-Senses: Downplayed. After having an annoying sound outside of human hearing range pointed out to him by his fellow augments, Bashir suddenly notices it and indeed finds it quite annoying, indicating that his senses are slightly less enhanced than theirs, but still above normal.
That Man Is Dead: He refuses to go by his childhood nickname 'Jules', insisting that Jules died on the operating table when he had undergone genetic augmentation.
Theme Initials: Bashir. Julian Bashir.
Token Heroic Orc: Julian is one of the few Augmented Humans in the franchise without any psychological or mental problems, a common side-effect amongst individuals who have undergone extensive genetic modification. It's a very sharp bell-curve. The "Jack Pack" augments in DS9 are not evil, but they are seriously maladjusted.
Took a Level in Cynic: He grows much more aware of the more morally gray realities of Starfleet and life in general over the course of the series, and is somewhat bitter about it.
Took a Level in Kindness: He's not an intentional jerk, but at first he's very much a condescending Upper-Class Twit and womanizer who's quite obnoxious, if unintentionally so. He becomes much kinder and more polite in the second season, with "The Wire" having him transition into a much more openly altruistic and noble character.
Took a Level in Badass: Once the Cold War turns hot, Bashir suddenly acts less like a squeaky-clean recruit and more like a battle hardened-veteran, and the shift is definitely in his favor. Having regular lunches with the Machiavellian Garak tends to have that effect.
Transhuman: Julian is actually genetically enhanced, similar to Khan Noonien Singh, due to his parents.
Tuxedo and Martini: Much like Reg Barclay in TNG, Bashir finds refuge in a holosuite playing his ideal self: a womanizer who has all the answers. It appears that Garak is a little jealous that Bashir is spending a lot of time with his new program instead of him and wants to find out what the fuss is all about. Imagine his surprise when it turns out Bashir is living a fantasy version of Garak's old lifestyle – there are just too many opportunities for mockery.
Garak: I think I joined the wrong intelligence service.
Upper-Class Twit: In earlier episodes, prior to Character Development. He pisses off Dax with being a Dogged Nice Guy, acts like a schoolboy with a crush that irritates parents over Garak, and puts his foot in his mouth immediately with Kira.
Urban Legend Love Life: Even the actor is amazed at Bashir's amazingly bad luck with women. The two early objects of his affection end up with Rom and Worf respectively. Ouch.
The Watson: Fittingly for the British doctor. Whenever there's a time-travel episode, Julian's general disinterest in history allows the others to explain stuff for the audience to him. As an added bonus, he's often the only one in the group who isn't a bridge officer, allowing the others to explain plans they made based on their command experience this way too.
What Measure Is a Non-Human?: The exposure of his past nearly got Bashir washed out of Starfleet. As it stands, Julian was guilty only of omitting that fact on his records; his father took the blame since Julian was under the age of consent for the procedure.
Why Couldn't You Be Different?: As a small child, Bashir had several severe learning disabilities, so his parents had him undergo an illegal and extremely dangerous genetic treatment. Since then, it is implied that they were Stage Parents, pushing him towards a high-profile, high-status occupation, instead of letting him make up his own mind, as well as constantly monitoring his behavior so as not to end up in prison. This is the cause of Bashir's resentment and estrangement towards them. How severe were his disabilities? According to Julian himself, he couldn't tell a dog from a cat at the age of six. However, Julian's parents only say that he was 'falling behind', and while he was the slowest learner in his class at all...he was in school, and his father describes his projected future of one of 'remedial education and underachievement' rather than institutionalisation or being cared for by the state.
Willfully Weak: Even before they decided he was genetically enhanced, "Distant Voices" revealed that he deliberately missed a question on the exam to avoid being first in his class. It was even suggested that if he tried harder with Jadzia, he'd have succeeded.
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Frequently deconstructed; the fresh-faced, brilliant young officer out of the Academy ends up wrong or in trouble many times due to his naivete. He gets better, but it still bites him sometimes, such as the late-season episode "Inter Arma Enim Silent Legis". Similarly, in "Past Tense," he admits to a willful ignorance when it comes to Federation history; he doesn't want to the know the facts because they're too depressing to take in. When he comes face to face with real poverty, he simply cannot get his head around the notion that the government turns a blind eye to anyone without money, finding even deliberate cruelty and hatred easier to understand than outright apathy over other people's pain.