Almighty Janitor: The only reason anything on DS9 works is because of him, a fact not lost on O'Brien. In practice, he is Head of Engineering for one of the Federation's most strategically important space stations, a gig that is usually given to a Commander, and orders around commissioned officers like no one's business. Even if he does not have the de jure ranks, he obviously has them de facto. Subverted a bit, because when someone like Bashir does buckle down and pull rank on him, he has no choice but to obey orders – he's just usually treated as higher up in the hierarchy due to his wealth of knowledge and experience.
Badass Normal: The only Non-Com main character in Trek. Among other things, he's been decorated 15 times by Starfleet, been in 235 separate tactical situations even before the Dominion War, and is recognized as an expert on the subject even by the Klingons.
Beware the Nice Ones: Devoted family man? Check. Dutiful NCO? Check. Capable of taking on Brainwashed and Crazy former Obsidian Order operative Garak on a booby-trapped station with minimal supplies and almost no backup, and winning? Check.
The Big Guy: Colm Meaney is not very tall but he's built like a tank. As to the character, see Beware the Nice Ones and Badass entries above.
Butt-Monkey: There was an "O'Brien must suffer" episode at least once a season, because the writers thought Colm Meaney was good in those plots. He tended to act as the scapegoat for the command staff's frustrations, particularly if the replicators broke down on a coffee break. Miles once attempted the Scotty Time trick on Sisko, but no dice ("Treachery, Faith, and the Great River"). Oh, and he tore his pants. Tellingly, O'Brien's suffering is an interdimensional constant. Even in the Mirror Universe, he's a put-upon engineer who gets no respect!
Catchphrase: "Well, I can see two possibilities.."
A Day in the Limelight: O'Brien gets a number of episodes dedicated to him – most notably the annual "O'Brien Must Suffer"-episodes where he is put through some hell or other.
Designated Victim: O'Brien has several episodes dedicated to him, and they all involve him getting the crap beaten out of him (either physically or emotionally), to the point where "O'Brien Must Suffer" became an in-joke with the cast, crew, and fandom. Some prime examples include "Whispers", "Tribunal" and "Visionary".
The entire series could be considered an "O'Brien Must Suffer" situation. At the start of the series, he moved to an out of the way space station orbiting an unimportant planet to raise his family in a more stable environment, only for the wormhole to be discovered on day one, causing the whole thing to eventually become the focal point for a giant, intergalactic war.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: As he complains in an early episode, he would like five minutes of peace and nobody demanding he fix something.
The Everyman: Devoted family man, down-to-earth soldier, and enlisted man.
Famed in Story: Star Trek: Lower Decks reveals that sometime in the future, he will be regarded as the greatest Starfleet hero of all time. Given his ability to survive pretty much anything while maintaining one of Starfleet's most important outposts with various technologies that shouldn't be compatible with each other, this is not unjustified.
Fantastic Racism: Occasionally towards Cardassians, and has been known to utter the phrase "Cardy Bastards". O'Brien fought in the Federation-Cardassian War and was present at the Setlik III massacre, an event that affected him deeply. This was also the first time he'd ever killed someone, vaporizing a Cardassian when he fired a phaser not knowing that it'd be set to maximum. As O'Brien summed up in TNG, he doesn't hate Cardassians; he hates what he became because of them.
He's not thrilled with Changelings either, Odo aside.
Fighting Irish: He may be a Nice Guy, but he's also a war hero with a bit of a temper and he's not afraid to throw a punch to protect his friends. He and his BFF Julian Bashir also enjoy holosuite programs of historical battles like the Alamo and the Battle of Britain.
Gadgeteer Genius: A lot of his job involves getting old, beaten-up, and/or alien technology to work, along with a fair bit of MacGyvering.
Happily Married: To Keiko, although–
Henpecked Husband: Sometimes. Keiko even smacked him once, when he missed his cue during a meditation ceremony for the in-delivery Kira...
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Julian Bashir. O'Brien almost remarked that he wished Keiko was more like Bashir.
Limited Advancement Opportunities: Given his record of genius and heroism, you'd expect him to make Master Chief by the end of the series, but he seems to stay an SCPO for the entire run. (Although it is possible that might be the top of the Starfleet NCO ranks, we haven't seen enough of them on screen to be sure). He does continually gain responsibilities and duties throughout the series, so there is a career progression of sorts going on. Starfleet security taps him for undercover work in "Honor Among Thieves" to help bring down the Orion Syndicate. A little odd that they chose a low ranking officer for this dangerous assignment, but O'Brien is perfect because he doesn't have to try to look like a schlub who is down on his luck. Of course, there's also the fact that he appears to be the only enlisted man in Starfleet.
Mr. Fixit: Miles to go before he sleeps... Well into Season 6, he's still running himself ragged trying to keep up with his work orders. The only reason all the hodgepodge of Federation and Cardassian technology on DS9 runs anything close to smoothly is because O'Brien's been working on it non-stop from day one. Unfortunately (for him), only O'Brien really understands how they work.
Non-Uniform Uniform: Downplayed, as he sometimes likes to wear his shirts with the sleeves rolled up — which is justified as he spends all day with his hands in various machines, and long sleeves would get in the way or get caught on something.
Odd Friendship: With Kira while she was carrying Kirayoshi. With hints of awkward Unresolved Sexual Tension in several later episodes.
Primarily with Julian. The two men are about 10 years apart. Julian is a doctor, and is career military. Miles is an enlisted officer and strictly an engineer. After a prickly couple of seasons, the pair become practically inseparable.
Old Soldier: It's noted that the Dominion War is actually his second war, having previously fought in the Federation-Cardassian border war. Add in his service on the Enterprise-D, including having survived several run-ins with the Borg, and O'Brien is arguably the most combat experienced person on DS9, perhaps barring the overall experience of the combined lives of the Dax symbiont.
Rank Up: inverted. He'd been a lieutenant on the Enterprise-D, but somehow became an enlisted man most likely due to having been a transporter chief and therefore addressed as "chief."
Real Men Hate Affection: With Julian. Even when they're totally sloshed, the most affectionate expression he can manage is "I really do... not hate you anymore" (though admittedly after telling Julian that people 'either love him or hate him.') And when he's telling Dr. Zimmerman all the things he does not hate about Julian, he's very insistent that it will remain confidential. Completely averted with his wife whom O'Brien all but dotes on.
The Reliable One: Miles may not be as brilliant as Dax or a hardened warrior like Worf, but he's brilliant enough to fix practically anything and respected as an experienced soldier.
Ridiculously Long-lived Family Name: The episode "Bar Association" reveals that O'Brien (a man in the 24th century) has an ancestor from the 19th century named Sean O'Brien.
Seduction-Proof Marriage: When O'Brien goes undercover in the Orion Syndicate in "Honor Among Thieves", the local boss offers him a prostitute as a gesture of Sacred Hospitality. However the boss is satisfied with this explanation for refusal.
In fact, O'Brien has several opportunities to cheat on Keiko throughout the show. He refuses every one.
Shell-Shocked Veteran: As mentioned on TNG, he's still haunted from his service in the Federation-Cardassian border war. During the Dominion War, he cuts himself from his friends as he knows not all of them will live survive and he's preemptively trying to avoid the trauma of losing them.
Spanner in the Works: As far as Sloan is concerned, O'Brien is an unpredictable factor. He may be able to play and manipulate Bashir, but it's O'Brien who leads to Sloan's undoing.
Timey-Wimey Ball: In the third-season episode "Visionary", O'Brien is sent to the future several times. Ultimately, "our" O'Brien dies and the one that comes back to the present is an O'Brien from two-and-a-half hours into the future.
Trademark Favorite Food: Like many of his fellow officers, he likes to start, continue, and sometimes end his day with a raktajino. More surprisingly, he loves Starfleet's combat rations, describing them as "the only thing I miss about the Cardassian front."
Veteran Instructor: Sort of slips into the old-hand mentor role in the final two seasons, and the Grand Finale sees him return to Earth to become an official instructor at the Academy.
War Hero: When he was called to testify at Worf's hearing, it was revealed that he had been in over two hundred combat engagements and received fifteen decorations from Starfleet for those actions, qualifying him as a expert in starship combat.
What You Are in the Dark: "Hard Time" involves this. He kills a good man for a scrap of bread. Even if that man was an illusion, O'Brien is so horrified at himself for that and taking his anger out on Molly that he attempts suicide. Bashir talks him down from the metaphorical ledge by pointing out that the extreme remorse he feels for those actions proves that he is still a good man at heart.