Abusive Parents:
Odo views Dr. Mora this way for a long time thanks to the unpleasant methods Mora used in researching him, even after learning that Odo was an organism rather than vaguely organic goop. There's also the name Odo itself: from the Cardassian word for "nothing.note "
Because of his painful infancy memories, Odo becomes very upset when Mora suggests he return to Mora's science facility for medical treatment in "The Alternate".
Odo: I am not going back to the center with you.
Mora: Why? We'll work through this together. We'll solve it together like we used to.
Odo: NO!!
Mora contends that he had Cardassians breathing down his neck for results and his methods motivated Odo to develop, and the two men eventually reconcile.
Furthermore, the Founders themselves. Their method of exploration involves sending their infants out helpless to gauge how they'd be treated. Odo was probably lucky compared to others, as the episode "Chimera" illustrates.
Achilles' Heel:
He must revert to his liquid form every sixteen hours to regenerate. This is involuntary: much like how a human can voluntarily take a nap, or try to avoid falling asleep, but eventually they'll lose consciousness from exhaustion. If Odo tries to push past hour sixteen, he'll experience pain and disorientation as more and more of his body reverts to liquid until he eventually loses his form altogether. Garak takes advantage from this when he joins the Obsidian Order, by torturing Odo with a device that locks him into his solid form - not sure what this will do. After many hours Odo is reduced to a dried-out corpse-like husk, with dry pieces of him flaking off.
His piloting skills are rudimentary. Although he can get a runabout from Point A to Point B, he relies on the autopilot to set courses and has to use the computer's built-in defense programming for evasive maneuvers, which isn't enough to evade living pilots.
All-Loving Hero: Strange given Odo's demeanor, but he absolutely loathes the notion of taking a single life. It just further sets him apart from his people, who have no problem causing casualties in the billions.
Always on Duty: Odo has a little trouble loosening up, especially around the senior staff (ostensibly his best friends). This is explored in numerous scenes such as Vic's lounge in "His Way" and Jadzia's bachelorette party in "You Are Cordially Invited"; although Odo only shows up to investigate 'noise complaints', he discreetly gestures to his deputies that he's giving them the night off.
Always Save the Girl:
In "Children of Time", his future self rewrote history to save Kira. Kira, however, wasn't pleased, and it created a rift between them that took months to heal. Possibly why he defies it later, when he tells the senior staff not to purge a Prophet from her body, as she is quite willing to risk her life in their battle.
Amicable Exes: Odo briefly marries Lwaxana Troi to help her get a previous abusive marriage annulled. While they divorce as soon as the situation is resolved, they remain good friends and genuinely fond of each other.
And Another Thing...: A staple of his investigative/interview technique, in the great tradition of Columbo.
Appropriated Appellation:
"Constable", Kira's derogatory nickname which he adopted. They were later to become close friends, and eventually lovers.
During the series, it's revealed that Odo's name is a shortened form of a Cardassian term, odo'ital ("nothing", a mistranslation of the Bajoran "unknown sample"), that the Cardassian overseers gave him during the Occupation. The Bajoran scientists studying him split the name into two parts, 'Odo Ital," similar to their own.
Awesomeness by Analysis: A significant part of why Odo is such an effective criminal investigator, along with the eidetic memory and sensitivity to details that comes with being a Founder. He most impressively demonstrates his skills in "Improbable Cause", in which he utilizes his knowledge of criminal behavior, information from an informant, and his own intuition to figure out that Garak blew up his own shop in order to force Starfleet to investigate, thwarting an actual assassination attempt. Even Garak, who is no slouch at analysis himself, is stunned that Odo was able to see through his deception so quickly.
When they had infiltrated a party for honored Klingon warriors, he had misgivings as he had locked into a human form by the Founders. He talked with the changeling impersonating Martok for a few minutes and deduced that he was The Mole.
Badass Arm-Fold: To emphasize his closed nature. He also enjoyed folding his arms right before an impending arrest.
Badass Boast: "Doctor, if a Klingon were to kill me, I'd expect nothing less than an entire opera on the subject."
Bare-Fisted Monk: Since Odo never carries a firearm of any kind, he usually relies on his fists or shapeshifting powers in a fight.
Big Brother Is Watching: He is always watching or listening in on Quark's outbound calls. Always. ("The Wire") He also offhandedly admits to monitoring Worf's calls after he arrives on the station, his reasoning being that Worf's detective work might not be up to standard and would require the Constable to step in and "take over."
Bizarre Alien Senses: as a shapeshifter, he is able to sense many things around himself - to an undefined extent, possibly due to more acute sense of touch combined with hearing so he can detect vibrations in the environment better. He can also shapeshift into animals that have multiple eyes in different places. One thing Odo never mastered though, is that he technically has no taste buds - it's unclear if he can taste or smell, which involves complex chemical interactions. As he explains, he can mime the act of eating food but doesn't find it particularly pleasurable because he can't really taste it (he can't digest whatever he chews so he just expels it later). Thus he enjoys three-dimensional artwork like sculptures, but sadly cannot enjoy Sisko's gourmet-level cuisine.
Body Horror: When an illness causes his physical appearance to deteriorate, such as the Section 31 virus and the infection inflicted on him by the Founders to force him back to the Great Link. Also when Garak tortures him using a device that prevents him from regenerating, he looks like a fresh rotting corpse.
Brought Down to Badass: After his fellow Founders Mode Lock him, Odo quickly proves that he's no slouch in hand-to-hand combat, and still demonstrates an impressive capacity for investigation. He's still a trained security officer, after all.
Brutal Honesty: The only thing blunter than Odo's manner of speaking is his face.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Regardless of its 'administrative' role, Starfleet really wanted no part of Constable Odo's gumshoe approach. Sisko, who manages to keep Odo from resigning in protest, admits he can relate to the Constable's forthright nature and pride in his own work. He would later praise Odo as "the best law enforcement in this sector — maybe the whole damn quadrant!"
By-the-Book Cop: Zigzagged. As a Control Freak, he is keen on maintaining order on the station, and Bothering by the Book is an straightforward means of achieving that. Nobody ever had to teach Odo the "justice trick" — it's ingrained into him on a genetic level, a glimpse into what his people might have really been like. In seeing how cruel the Founders' inborn obsession with order makes them, Odo eventually becomes that much more determined to temper his own Control Freak tendencies, eventually taking pride in his willingness to bend the rules.
Can't Shift While Shifted: Odo's shapeshifting powers are due to him being a gelatinous Blob Monster, so whenever he transforms into another being, animal, or object, he usually has to resume a gelatinous state first, which isn't the full blob.
Catchphrase: "It's been my observation..."
Celibate Hero: At first. In the first season, he admits that he has never "coupled" and fails to see the appeal of it. Subverted later in the series when Arissa takes his virginity, when the Female Changeling enchants him, and when he and Kira fall in love.
Character Tics:
The short, businesslike nod he gives to acknowledge orders from his superiors. It's basically series shorthand for 'this is now guaranteed to happen'.
He also features a condescending grunt (...Huh) that almost qualifies as a Catchphrase. Usually aimed at Quark — in fact, it's the last thing he "says" to him.
Clueless Chick-Magnet: Odo might be the sharpest law enforcer on the beat but when it comes to "humanoid coupling" he is completely at sea. This despite the fact that there are multiple occasions when he meets solid women who obviously want to, hmmm, "jump in the bucket." When Garak tries to set him up with the foxy owner of The Celestial Café he completely misses his cue and lets her sashay out of sight!
Odo: The next time you call me, it had better be to report a crime.
Garak: (exasperated) Now that you mention it, I've just witnessed a crime.
Combat Pragmatist: Odo really is an effective weapon during wartime, being able to slide out of walls and turn into ropes to trip people up.
The Comically Serious: He actually invokes it sometimes.
Compact Infiltrator: Because he's not very good at shapeshifting into other sentient beings, Odo prefers to use animal or object forms for infiltration. In the event that he doesn't just smuggle himself into a restricted area as an object, he'll become something small enough to creep through narrow spaces... or simply revert to his gelatinous natural form and pour himself through a vent cover.
Contrasting Sequel Protagonist: He was designed as one to Spock and Data, the previous major "alien" characters with a disconnect from humanity. Where Spock was deeply human but tried to hide it and Data desperately wanted to be human, Odo is ambivalent towards humanity and has no real attachment to it outside of liking his human co-workers. And where the former two were governed by logic, Odo is very emotional and wears his heart on his sleeve.
Control Freak: Odo gets pissed off when his furniture is moved by centimeters. He later learns his entire race is like that which is part of why they formed the Dominion.
Cowboy Cop: Zigzagged, with a dash of The Sheriff. He (usually) follows the rules to the letter, but isn't above letting the small fish go free in pursuit of a bigger offender. Contrast with Worf, who doesn't share Odo's discretion and bungles a few cases.
Ira Behr: I was told six months before the series began that Odo was going to be a Clint Eastwood type... And then I was told Rene Auberjonois. And I said, 'Clint Eastwood, Rene Auberjonois. Clint Eastwood, Rene Auberjonois. Does not compute.'
Odo is actually rather contemptuous of vulgar 'law' since, in his experience, it's merely a vehicle to maintain the status quo. In "The Wire," he casually admits to intercepting all of Quark's long-distance calls, as well as the sheer illegality of it. But, if it's in "the interest of station security"... He also chafes under Sisko's new Starfleet regulations and bylaws — which he receives almost daily — and constantly protests to be left alone.
"At the request of Commander Sisko, I will hereafter be recording a daily log of law enforcement affairs. The reason for this exercise is beyond my comprehension, except perhaps that Humans have a compulsion to keep records and lists and files. So many in fact, that they have to invent new ways to store them microscopically. Otherwise their records would overrun all known civilization. My own very adequate memory not being good enough for Starfleet, I am pleased to put my voice to this official record of this day: Everything's under control. End log."
It's played as a joke, but also an unsettling look into how his species thinks. In the Great Link, Changeling society is permissive and free of boundaries, and yet they are ruthless in enforcing structure on solids.
Essentially, Odo is a "Cowboy Cop" in the sense that he "plays by his own rules" - he does have his own rules and follows them very strictly, but his strong sense of "justice" in the abstract doesn't always align with whatever bureaucratic "laws" happen to be in place. For example he abhors the idea of taking a life (except on extremely rare, unavoidable occasions) and thus voluntarily chooses not to carry a gun.
Dating Catwoman: A brief sexual relationship with the Female Changeling, under the guise of learning about solids and their personal habits. Really, she had hoped to brainwash him into letting go of Kira.
Deadpan Snarker: When he's not being The Comically Serious. Quark is his principal victim, naturally.
Defrosting Ice Queen: Starts the series perplexed and often disdainful of humanoid habits, such as courtship rituals which involve "bad poetry and sacrificing plants." As the series progresses, he participates in humanoid activities and comes to appreciate his colleagues.
Deuteragonist: As an adopted Bajoran, a holdover from the Cardassian occupiers, a Federation consultant on matters of internal security, and a member of the Dominion's founding race, Odo has inside knowledge of all the majors players in the war. His return to the Great Link is the final gesture toward peace.
Dirty Business: Years after the fact, he still feels guilty for having worked for the Cardassian occupiers. He admired Arissa for escaping from a dishonorable life whereas he did not.
Disappointing Heritage Reveal: Odo was found in the area around a wormhole and grew up without knowing who his people were. He would later he would later learn that they are the Founders, tyrants who oppress non-shapeshifters and run a brutal regime.
Does Not Like Guns: Prefers to use shapeshifting whenever possible, out of his reluctance to take a life. He outright refuses to use firearms on many occasions. The instances he actually fights in an open battle (such as episodes "Way of the Warrior" or "To The Death"), he either goes hand to hand or uses his shapeshifting powers to create Combat Tentacles.
Don't You Dare Pity Me!:
When Odo falls ill, Kira doesn’t bring Odo flowers or try to keep him company; Kira knows him better than anybody and brings him this week's criminal activity report! ("Broken Link")
When he catches Section 31's virus, he once again says he doesn't want anyone's pity, not even Kira's.
Early-Installment Weirdness:
In several scenes from "A Man Alone", Rene Auberjonois uses his normal speaking voice instead of the gravelly voice he would use for Odo throughout the series.
Odo's hair is brown in the first season, but would be blond in the rest of the series.
Rene Auberjonois' facial makeup is much more severe, gaunt, and alien-looking in the first season or so. Later seasons soften his features quite a bit. Viewing Season 1 Odo and Season 7 Odo side-by-side is a stark contrast.
Emotional Maturity Is Physical Maturity: Zigzagged. He has the appearance and psychological makeup of a middle-aged man despite only having been active for about 30 years. However, he was adrift in space as an infant Changeling for an unknown amount of time, meaning that he is likely chronologically older than he appears. Since his race is apparently immortal, other Changelings treat him as a youth. The way the infant Changeling in "The Begotten" matures (as well as Odo's reminiscence of his early days in Mora's lab) implies that however old they are physically, they don't actually begin to develop without sustained interprersonal interaction—which in the Link comes from the rest of the Link, but for the Hundred, only begins when they land somewhere with a sentient race.
Establishing Character Moment: Stomping around the Promenade like he owns the place, getting in Sisko's grill, and barking that he doesn't allow phasers in that area. This after discovering that Ben Sisko is new CO.
Evil Mentor: The Female Changeling.
Expressive Hair:
Odo's hairstyle communicates his obsession with tidiness and order. Very rarely does Odo's hair fall past his face; when it does, it signals that he is figuratively and literally 'coming apart'.
It's also an exact copy of Dr. Mora's hair, showing that despite the anger he feels towards him, Odo still bases part of himself off Dr. Mora.
Face–Heel Turn: A short one in Season 6, when the Female Shapeshifter links with him. It comes off rather as More than Mind Control, but it's a huge blow to Kira's resistance group and it nearly gets Rom executed.
Fantastic Racism:
He's on the receiving end of this when he is a suspect in a Bajoran's murder. His office is vandalized and an angry mob threatens to kill him.
His fellow Changelings are baffled that Odo is not overtly racist toward "solids." The Female Changeling tries to pull Odo from his life among humanoids several times, and the Changeling infiltrator invites Odo to leave them. Even Laas is profoundly distrustful of humanoids.
Fantastic Slur: Odo bristles whenever someone calls him a shapeshifter. While the term is accurate, it carries negative connotations among the more hostile "solids" (on Bajor and elsewhere).
Film Noir: Repeatedly notes that he's a big fan of the Private Detective genre, especially the cases of Mike Hammer, but he's also quite fond of the works of Raymond Chandler and Dashiell Hammett. "Necessary Evil" (the episode where the character quote comes from) has a big-time Noir "vibe", down to Odo giving a Private Eye Monologue, and "A Simple Investigation" is also pretty pulp-ish, though less dark. Unsuprisingly, both are Odo-centric episodes.
Final Solution: Averted. He prevents a Changeling genocide when he agrees to return to the Great Link and cure the other changelings of a devastating virus engineered by Section 31.
A Form You Are Comfortable With: He spends much of his time in humanoid form in order to interact smoothly with solids. And with good reason; in "Chimera," Quark observes that Odo's liquid form triggers primal fears in humanoids, thanks to evolution.
Friend to All Children: Odo has always been friendly with children. He gladly jokes around with a young girl in "Shadowplay", and is seen as being a stern yet fair authority figure to Nog and Jake during their childhood. He adopts an infant Changeling in "The Begotten" and mentors a Jem'Hadar child in "The Abandoned".
Foil: To Garak of all people. Both of them are outsiders from the Federation or Bajor, living in exile on Deep Space Nine, who are at times more ruthless or cavalier than their Federation counterparts, but who still have their own strong personal moral codes. These moral codes are so alien, however, that they can at times seem like Blue-and-Orange Morality: Odo is dedicated to "Justice" and "Order" in an abstract sense that transcends specific laws, while Garak does what he believes is best for Cardassia, regardless of whatever government is currently in power.
Guile Hero: Manages to thread the needle between two factions in a telepathically induced mutiny and save the station by playing on everyone's paranoia and plotting in "Dramatis Personae".
Hard Boiled Detective: Doesn't play by all of Starfleet's rules, has a distinctly cynical worldview, and more than once follows his cases to a conclusion that nobody likes.
Harmless Liquefaction: Odo actually needs to turn into a liquid every sixteen hours.
Hates Small Talk: Inevitably leading up to making small talk with Worf about how they hate small talk.
Haughty "Hmph": Odo will give a "Hmph" at every available opportunity. It was basically his Catchphrase.
Hot Skitty-on-Wailord Action: In the "Chimera" episode, he embraces Kira while in the form of shimmering light.
Hulk Out: An encounter with an alien gas disrupts Odo's body, turning him into a giant monster reminiscent of Yellow Devil from Mega Man. An emotional trigger is required for the change, and afterward Odo had no memories of his actions. ("The Alternate")
Hyper-Awareness: Odo has a knack for noticing details, which goes hand-in-hand with his analytical abilities. As a Changeling, he is extraordinarily sensitive to changes in his physical environment, which Jadzia exploits to annoy him. But even after being forced to become a solid, Odo was able to out Martok as a changeling by picking up on his failure to understand the concept of honor.
Hypocrite: A downplayed example; Odo is often an insufferable Rules Lawyer and Obstructive Bureaucrat who enforces laws unfailingly, even on children who are loitering. On the other hand, Odo can't stand other influences interfering in his work and greatly resents Starfleet regulations forcing him to do things like make records of his arrests. It becomes unsettling when you discover that Odo is a mild example of his race: he may resent his orders but he still follows them, whereas the Changelings as a whole have no laws or barriers except for those they impose on everyone under them.
He detests having his privacy invaded, yet has no compunctions about spying on everyone else on the station. All for security purposes, of course.
He looks down on collaborators as much as any Bajoran, but he himself might be interpreted as a collaborator, since he worked for the Cardassians for several years. Though this one is heavily downplayed in that he is not a Bajoran. As an outsider alien he was not betraying his people to the Cardassians, and thus was primarily seen as an independent, neutral arbiter capable of resolving disputes between the Bajorans and Cardassians.
I Can't Believe a Guy Like You Would Notice Me: Gender-flipped. This is never actually said aloud after Odo finally gets Kira. That doesn't stop it from being written all over his face every time he so much as looks at her.
His surpise at Kira's love might spring from doubts that the Female Changeling instilled in him in "Heart of Stone".
Female Changeling: She's never going to love you. How could she? You are a changeling.
I Don't Want to Ruin Our Friendship: After he reveals his feelings and Kira is no longer with Shakaar, Odo tells her that he would ask her out, but with the Dominion and all he wants to put it off until they have more time.
I Hate Past Me: Kurtwood Smith plays Odo's Cardassian avatar "Thrax". ("Things Past") Fascinatingly, Thrax gets to interrogate himself while Odo pulls at all of the loose strings in Thrax’s (thus his) prosecution of a case. The younger Odo was happy to work with circumstantial evidence and make snap judgements about peoples' character if it landed him convictions, caring more about order over justice.
Interspecies Romance: With Arissa and later Kira. His relationship with Arissa ended when it was discovered that she was married, and the latter ended when Odo returned to the Great Link to cure his people of a morphogenic virus that threatened to wipe them out, though it's made painfully clear that they loved each other as much as ever.
Invisible Introvert: On top of being a shapeshifter capable of impersonating almost anyone or anything, Odo's also quite asocial; though he's hardly a Shrinking Violet, he's extremely private, reserved, blunt-natured, and by his own admission, he hates parties. Even once he mellows out, he's still quite rigid and uncomfortable in social gatherings.
Involuntary Shapeshifting: In "The Alternate," when he unconsciously transforms into a monster several times.
King Incognito: Way incognito. He's the only one of his kind in the Alpha Quadrant, but is revered as a God on his home turf.
Rightful King Returns: Although reluctant to acknowledge his God status, Odo's encounter with Weyoun 6 shook him to the core. He eventually woke up to the realization that only he could rein in the Dominion's soldiers ("build a new Dominion") and educate the Great Link on the ways of Solids.
Knight in Sour Armor: A cranky, suspicious cynic who's nevertheless a stalwart believer in justice.
Literal Transformative Experience: The aftermath of regaining his powers and transforming for the first time in months proves quite a change in perspective for him, especially following the experience of having to care for a baby Changeling with Dr. Mora's help; having finally learned how much he meant to Mora, he promises not to fall out of touch with him again.
Longing Look: Constantly at Kira.
Love Makes You Dumb: The Female Changeling has this effect on him for a while.
Magic Pants: Justified in that he creates clothing out of his own substance.
Meaningful Name: His original name, Odo Ital, is derived from odo'ital ("nothing" in Cardassian, a mistranslation of the Bajoran "unknown sample"). As an infant, Odo was studied in a science facility on Cardassian-occupied Bajor.
Messianic Archetype: As a parallel to Sisko's ascension to the Celestial Temple, Odo essentially becomes this to his people upon the end of the war with the Dominion. Odo rejoins with his people in the Great Link, healing and saving the Changelings by curing them of Section 31's bioweapon, as well as beginning to redeem them by teaching them a better, more peaceful and just way of life, about his experiences in the Alpha Quadrant and that not all solids need to be feared or hated, that coexistence is possible.
Mode Lock:
In "Broken Link," where the Founders lock him into the form of a regular human (with a Frozen Face) in retaliation for his being the first Changeling to kill another. In the Founders' eyes, this was a fate worse than death. Another failing of his newfound humanity is that he can now be punched in the face which he suffers in "The Assignment".
Female Changeling: Oh, poor Odo. Perhaps we should have killed you. It would have been far less cruel.
However, he regains his shapeshifting ability after the events of "The Begotten".
Garak uses this as a torture method in "The Die is Cast", leading to some nasty Body Horror.
Moe Couplet: With Kira.
Monster Roommate: In "The Search, Part I," he briefly serves as this to Quark, literally and figuratively. Limited space on board the Defiant means that the two must share quarters, which becomes very uncomfortable for both men when Odo has to liquefy in order to rest.
Odo: I have been holding this shape for sixteen hours. I have to revert back to my liquid state, but I don't want you to watch and gawk at me.
Quark: I understand, completely. This is a very private moment and I won't interfere. This won't be so bad, sharing—
Odo: AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAARGH!!! I HAVE NO INTEREST IN SPEAKING TO YOU—OR IN LISTENING TO YOUR WITLESS PRATTLE! SO STAY OUT OF MY WAY—OR YOU'LL REGRET THE DAY YOU EVER MET ME!
Morality Chain: Kira. In "Chimera," Laas insists that Kira is the only reason Odo hasn't left Deep Space Nine and joined the Dominion.
Odo: I won't have anything to do with the Founders and their war.
Laas: Odo, we linked. I know the truth. You stayed here because of Kira. If it weren't for her, you would be with our people. War or no war, you would be a Founder!
Moses in the Bulrushes: He was discovered in the Denorios Belt as an infant.
Mundane Utility: Shapeshifting is a wonderful talent for espionage. It also lets you give terrific massages.
Muscles Are Meaningless: Being a Changeling, he's stronger than he looks. Odo is shown repeatedly overpowering criminals through the series. In "Crossfire", he even stops a free-falling turbolift.
My God, What Have I Done?: In "Sacrifice of Angels," when the Female Changeling tells him she's planning on executing Kira, he realizes just how deeply he's fallen under the spell of the Dominion and what it's going to cost him.
My Greatest Failure: Allowing Dukat to execute three innocent Bajorans as retribution for a bomb attack. There was enough evidence to at the very least arrest, but had Odo dug deeper, he would have been able to find them innocent, instead of the amount needed to satisfy the Cardassian judicial system.
My Species Doth Protest Too Much: The Founders protest far too much.
Neat Freak: Is very upset after Dax shifts all the things in his room by centimeters.
Odo: You humanoids are all alike, you have no sense of order! And Dax is the most humanoid person I know.
Unfortunately, without realizing it, by being this much of a neat freak, he's being a stereotypical Changeling.
Female Changeling: It is not justice you desire, Odo—but order, the same as we do.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: On Star Trek: Picard, Odo's actions in ending the Dominion War turned out to have emboldened some of the more zealous members of the Dominion, who are hellbent on avenging their defeat as punishment for the Federation nearly wiping them out with a virus—information which Odo undoubtedly provided when he rejoined the Great Link. Now, they've infiltrated Starfleet at every level, framed Picard and the crew of the Titan-A for crimes they didn't commit, and are planning to burn the Federation to the ground on the eve of its 250th anniversary.
Ninja Pirate Zombie Robot: A starfish alien shapeshifter cop. In space.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: His haircut and facial features bear a certain resemblance, arguably, to Kirk Douglas.
Noodle Incident:
Before Odo became the chief of security on Terok Nor, he was popular among the Cardassians for performing a "Cardassian neck trick". What exactly this entailed is never elaborated on, but it is something Odo is not very proud of.
Odo apparently attempted to eat shortly after he first learned to assume humanoid form, but states that the experience was unsatisfying as he has no sense of taste, also adding that the experience was 'messy' for reasons he doesn't elaborate on.
During the period where he was turned into a solid he was required to eat food. During a medical checkup he thanks Dr. Bashir for the prescription to "relax." And drink prune juice.
No Sense of Humor: Typically, yes — Quark's humor tends to make him angry. But he is a very Deadpan Snarker, and on one occasion, pranked Bashir and O'Brien alongside Quark by making them believe they'd shrunken.
Not So Above It All: He may regard humanoid behavior with varying levels of annoyance and confusion, but he really gets into his role as umpire during a baseball game. Even Kira can hardly believe it.
Obstructive Bureaucrat: Odo finds that acting this way—or threatening to—is a good way to keep Quark in line. Paradoxically, he also complains that Starfleet regulations are too bureaucratic.
Odd Friendship:
Odo can't resist Garak's tantalizing tales about his shady past, and Garak is similar intrigued by the Constable's reticence regarding his origins. Both are also the "last of their kind" in a sense; Garak is the last remaining Cardassian still living on the station, and Odo's the only shapeshifter (as far as he knows) in this quadrant. Both of them are unable to go home, and guilt-ridden over working against their own peoples' interests.
Odo's friendship with Lwaxana Troi also counts. Lwaxana is very smitten with Odo, but he doesn't reciprocate. Nonetheless, after sharing deep secrets with one another while trapped in an elevator one day, the two forge a strong bond with one another and trust each other implicitly, with Odo going above and beyond to aid her when the need arises, such as agreeing to marry her so she could maintain custody of a son she sires with another alien who was insistent on taking her child from her.
Funny enough, Quark considers his relationship with Odo to be this. They're both sworn enemies, with Quark looking over his shoulder to scheme his way to a quick profit, and Odo always making sure he doesn't try anything, but to paraphrase the Ferengi, he's the closet thing he has to a friend. Hell, Quark has actually come to Odo's defense from time to time, and even Odo knows when Quark isn't up to his usual schemes when the problem of the week is usually blamed on the bartender.
An Odd Place to Sleep: In a bucket. Beat that, Worf.
After losing and then regaining his shapeshifting powers, he tried to keep to sleeping in a bed (as he rather enjoyed it), but kept sliding off when he reverted to his gelatinous form.
Older and Wiser: His other self in "Children of Time" thinks he is older and wiser than his younger, emotionally-stilted self. However, his actions lead to the colony being erased from time.
OOC Is Serious Business: Odo is normally composed and emotionally rigid. Whenever he loses his composure, it's a sign that something is very, very wrong. In "The Alternate," Odo's loss of composure during his heated conversation with Mora Pol foreshadows his transformation into a monstrous creature. In "Things Past," his hunched posture and anxiety are related to his shame over allowing the Cardassians to execute three innocent Bajorans years before.
Oppose What You Suffered: In the fifth season Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode "The Begotten", Odo, who has had his shapeshifting abilities taken away, tries to raise an infant shapeshifter. When Odo himself was an infant, he was treated as a mere lab specimen and even subjected to painful experiments before he could convince the scientists he was self-aware, and now he works hard to protect the infant shapeshifter from suffering the same fate, refusing to allow the man whose cruel experiments helped Odo gain control over his own shapeshifting abilities in the first place to help. Instead, Odo chooses to raise the infant shapeshifter in a very gentle, nurturing manner. Eventually, however, the scientist who raised Odo demonstrates that raising an infant may also require a bit of Tough Love on occasion when Odo's progress hits a wall.
Order vs. Chaos: Odo is outright stated to be the finest security officer in the quadrant (and possibly the franchise), and DS9 has absolutely no qualms about admitting that he is an unapologetic authoritarian. On a Dominion scale, these urges lead to war and genocide; but they also give you clean promenades.
Parental Substitute: To the Infant Changeling in "The Begotten" and the Jem'Hadar boy in "The Abandoned." With the latter, he tries to teach him I Am Not a Gun, but the kid really likes being a gun and so Odo sends him to the Dominion. He has more success with the Changeling infant, but it dies before the episode is over.
Patient Zero: Of the Section 31 virus.
Perpetual-Motion Monster: Odo never eats or drinks. It's unclear if he needs to breath (notably, another of his kind was seen surviving unprotected in the vaccuum of space). Several times it is pointed out that he must "regenerate" every day, which is the equivalent of sleep.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Mrs. Troi. Although it is non-romantic, she is the only person (aside from Kira) that he admits to loving. He even married her to protect her and her child.
Punished with Ugly: As part of his punishment, the Founders froze him into a solid form nigh-identical to a human (solids being repulsive to them), but with the same malformed not-quite-right face that was the closest he could muster when he was able to shapeshift, thus marking him among humanity as well. Ouch.
Rage Breaking Point: In "Crossfire," when he smashes up his quarters in a fit of romantic jealousy.
Raised by Natives: He's a Changeling who was raised by a Bajoran scientist, surrounded by humanoids all his life.
Raised in a Lab: Odo was first discovered as an infant Changeling and was taken to the Bajoran Institute of Science where he was kept and studied until he managed to prove that he was actually sentient. Even then he was still treated as a science experiment or as a sideshow freak to entertain the Cardassian occupiers. This lead to a great deal of bitterness and resentment that he carried for years after he finally left the Institute.
Real Men Wear Pink: In "The Ascent", we learn that he reads romance novels.
Reveling in the New Form: Odo greatly enjoys turning into animals as a hobby, with birds being a particular favorite.
Romantic False Lead: Arissa, and later the Female Changeling.
A Rotten Time to Revert: Odo needs to revert to his liquid state every 16-18 hours... and due to the Rule of Drama, the need rarely arises on-screen unless something horrific, dangerous, or just plain embarrassing is underway. Case in point, getting stuck in a turbolift with Lwaxana Troi or being interrogated by the Cardassians.
Rules Lawyer: Allow Odo to get his hands on a baseball rulebook, and weep.
"No player shall at any time make contact with the umpire in any manner. The prescribed penalty for the violation is immediate ejection from the game. Rule Number 4.06, Sub-Section A, paragraph four. Look it up, but do it in the stands. You're GONE!"
Shown Their Work: That's the actual rule directly from the Major League Baseball handbook (as of the episode's airing).
As part of his objectivity, he did it to both teams. Though he clearly enjoyed doing it to Solok.
He also arrests a cleric for collecting charitable donations on the Promenade without a permit, which gets him in hot water with Kira.
Save the Villain: He cures the Female Changeling of a deadly virus afflicting the Changeling race.
Screw the Rules, I'm Doing What's Right!: Frequently comes up for him through the series, as a neutral, independent, fair dispenser of justice who is not part of the bureaucratic Federation, Bajor or Cardassian Union.
He helps Quark to prevent the unjust execution of his ex girlfriend Natima Lang and her two students because their actions don't warrant anything so harsh.
Shapeshifter Baggage: Problems with mass and density arise many times. Some examples:
In the third episode, he transforms himself into a rat. (Sorry, Cardassian vole.) note  He must be an incredibly dense rat.
In "Vortex" he becomes a drinking glass so small and lightweight that Rom can carry it with ease. In the same episode, Croden must carry Odo, who is knocked unconscious by a falling rock (even this raises questions) and Croden later remarks that Odo is "heavier than he looks." If Odo is so heavy, the glass should have been heavy as well.
In "The Begotten", Odo becomes a bird and flies around the promenade.
In "Chimera", Odo apparently becomes a shimmering light, or something.
Shapeshifter Default Form: Although he normally appears as a humanoid adult male, his natural state is a gelatinous liquid. To rest, he must regularly return to his gelatinous form.
Shapeshifter Showdown: With a Changeling infiltrator in "The Adversary."
Shapeshifting Squick: He and the Female Changeling have sexual relations in humanoid form during the occupation of Deep Space Nine. She tells him that it's nothing to the intimacy of the Great Link.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Quark. In his own words, "I always investigate Quark".
The Snark Knight: Always manages to have something snarky to say about everything.
The Social Expert: Zig-zagged. Odo is adept at reading subtle facial cues and body language, as demonstrated in "Necessary Evil". Despite his skill at reading people, he still finds much of humanoid behavior baffling and spends the series slowly learning how to integrate with humanoids.
The Spock: He may have a reputation for being a dispassionate and fair arbiter of law and order, by both the Bajorans and Cardassians, but eventually he becomes a deconstruction of the trope. As the series progresses, he's often forced to make decisions beyond simple logic, and we see more of the strong emotions beneath the surface which occasionally cloud his judgment, particularly his loneliness and disconnection from everyone else, and his struggles to reconcile the cruelty of his own people against his friends.
The Spymaster: He has an impressive collection of informers including people in the Klingon, Romulan, and Starfleet intelligence services and at least one Cardassian gul.
Stiff Upper Lip: The Founders are not above hurting or humiliating Odo to make him come home to stand trial, and once he realizes that he can no longer keep shape, he willingly relinquishes his post — but he refuses to be aided in the long walk from his office to the Defiant. He walks along the Promenade with pride despite the fact that he could turn into a puddle of goo at any minute. ("Broken Link")
Quark: Then you are coming back.
Odo: Count on it!
Quark: (sincerely) I will.
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: He may seem cold and unfeeling on the outside, but those who know him admit that's he's just about the sweetest man alive. Mrs. Troi and Kira are very good at bringing this out of him.
Superpowered Evil Side: His unconscious transformation into a monstrous form in "The Alternate," triggered by exposure to a psychotropic gas on L-S VI.
Technically Naked Shapeshifter: He typically forms clothing out of himself while in humanoid form. On a typical episode, the only part of Odo that's not made of himself is his comm badge, which he hides inside himself when he shifts into a form that doesn't include it.note 
Technical Pacifist: Wavers back and forth between this and Actual Pacifist. Even after spending decades as DS9's Chief of Security and being a prominent figure in a galactic war, Odo never used a weapon or fired a shot. He isn't averse to others doing so, and will tackle a criminal or disable a Changeling if it comes to it. In all the show's seven seasons, Odo only kills one person.
Thou Shalt Not Kill: Odo is averse to killing, regardless of the situation. "The Adversary" has Odo kill another changeling out of desperation, and he is clearly distraught about it. In "Tacking into the Wind," Odo is noticeably upset that Kira, Damar and Garak had to kill the bridge crew of the Dominion ship they were on, rather than simply subduing them.
Token Heroic Orc: Until Season 3, nobody has the slightest inkling that DS9's lowly security chief is a relative of the Dominion's Shadow Dictators.
Unusual Ears: While in humanoid form, his ears are smooth and blunted, like his facial features.
Unwanted False Faith: He's disturbed whenever he interacts with a Vorta and Jem'Hadar and hears them talking about him as a god, insisting he's equal to them.
Uptight Loves Wild: You really can't get more uptight than Odo, yet he falls for a hot-headed former terrorist suspicious of all authority.
Verbal Tic: Odo frequently gives a disdainful huff, usually with Quark as the object of his disdain.
Viking Funeral: In his supposedly last log entry as Chief of Security, a freezing Odo expressed his wish that should his remains be discovered on the mountain, that they be cremated and returned to the wormhole where he originated from. ("The Ascent") This is not unlike the standard photon torpedo burial for Starfleet officers. However, Odo preferred to have the ashes placed in his sleeping bucket.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Quark, eventually. Even early on in Season 2, Sisko notes that when Quark has been hospitalized, Odo looks like he's lost his best friend.
Voluntary Shapeshifting: Odo can turn into pretty much any thing he so desires, although he's bad at mimicking humanoid facial features. (This really means he remains visibly alien - he has no problem with the features of animals or objects.) On-screen, we don't see him transform that much due to budgetary concerns outside of the odd piece of furniture. He does have a lot of dialogue talking about more fantastical bits of shapeshifting he can do, like turning into a sort of alien rhinocerous to let off steam.
What Beautiful Eyes!: Arissa thinks that Odo has ‘bedroom eyes’. Fortunately, even a guileless prude like Odo can still get laid in the Star Trek universe.
What Measure Is a Humanoid?: Odo has a crush on the Human Alien Kira and at times there are hints the relationship could work out, despite Odo really being a bunch of slime.
What the Hell, Hero?:
Gets this from Kira when he explains that his older self erased the Gaian colonists from the timeline to save her life. She is not happy to be made the cause of that.
When he becomes involved with the Female Changeling and neglects his resistance responsibilities during the occupation of Deep Space Nine. Given the Founder's brutal tyranny and the Female Changeling's previous antics, this was not his smartest move. Kira angrily calls him out on it.
When He Smiles: Odo usually has a dour expression on his face that denotes disdain and toughness, but when he does smile, his happiness is so palpable and innocent.
Worthy Opponent: Though he would sooner die than admit it to the man in question, he considered Quark to be this. Turns out, Quark not only felt the same way, he was much more open about it. Calling Odo this to his face in the finale. The episode The Ascent brings this up in a somewhat unique way as Odo at first finds humor in the fact that Quark was never as big time a "businessman" (read: criminal) as he liked to think he was. Quark fired back at him that it meant that Odo had spent a decade of his life trying to bring Quark down and usually with no success on even the smallest thing, leading to him summing up their relationship to date with the line "which one of us is the bigger failure?" The look on Odo's face is priceless, and you can see that despite Quark cutting his own ego down a bit, that there is general respect for his longtime arch-nemesis there. At the end of the episode, both of them state their previous claims to hate one another during the episode were legitimate and real and that both meant what they said...and then start laughing like complete idiots about it.
You Are What You Hate: He hates the collaborators who sold out Bajor to Cardassia, but he also carries a lot of internal guilt for the things he did while working for the Cardassians.
You Can't Go Home Again: Odo spends the first three seasons longing to find his homeland and people, but upon discovering they're a society of tyrants, he can't go back home without betraying all his friends in the Federation to certain doom.
You Just Told Me: He seems to grasp the criminal mind to such an extent that he can manipulate them into giving up at least a nugget of information. Not bad for someone who seems otherwise bewildered by humanoids. As for Ferengi (Quark and Rom), he plays them like fiddles.