Affectionate Nickname: As he’s their older brother/parental figure, he’ll sometimes call Roman “Romey”, Kendall “Kenny", and Shiv “Baby”, still treating them as little kids.
At Least I Admit It: Downplayed, since he's hardly over-brimming with self-awareness, but what probably makes him the most sympathetic, decent and likeable of the Roy children is that he at least has some (or at least develops a little) with regards to who he is and what he really wants. His siblings have pretensions of greatness and becoming masters of the universe despite the fact that they are to the letter basically inept nepo-babies who have only really succeeded to the degree they have because they've lived lives of immense privilege and have a huge security net to fall into when they inevitably fuck things up. Connor, meanwhile, is exactly the same — but the difference is that he accepts this and deep down doesn't really want to be anything else, and is at his most relaxed and satisfied when he's basically just embracing the life and privileges of the indulgent super-rich. Even things like his run for president are clearly just vanity projects designed to pass the time and make him feel like he's accomplishing something rather than being out of any genuine lust for power and sincere belief that he's destined for greatness.
Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: Always has a project of the week, before swiftly moving onto something else. Alan Ruck believes his ADHD is undiagnosed thanks to Logan's embarrassment over perceived weakness and abnormalities of cognition or emotion.
Berserk Button:
His mother might be one, as evidenced by how he reacts to Roman joking about her institutionalization.
He gets angry at people who forget he is the eldest son.
Remember: it's not true he hasn't worked a day in his life! He is a hard-working rancher on the verge of setting up a podcast on Napoleonic history!
Big Brother Instinct: Throwaway lines in season three indicate that he was a good older brother figure for Kendall and Roman in Logan's absence before they were irrevocably soured by the family business.
Logan: So, what's this, uh... fishing thing? I don't remember.
Roman: Oh, yeah, that was, uh, Connor, actually. Connor took me on that. But, you know... single, multi-use, happy childhood memory, so, yeah.
He also tries to be a good older brother to Shiv, hoping she at least had fun at the ranch and offering to walk her down the aisle.
When Logan passes away during his wedding, Connor immediately retracts a statement he makes about Logan not loving him when he sees how badly his siblings are taking the news, and pivots to comfort them right away.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: He tries very hard to establish himself as the more virtuous of the siblings and the only one to not engage in the cutthroat actions Logan encourages but his efforts, while often well-meaning, tend to get derailed any time his sense of entitlement is infringed upon.
Butt-Monkey:
In general, Connor is treated as an afterthought at best, and an incompetent loon at worst by his family, simply because they know he has a fanciful understanding of himself and reality, and has no interest in or experience towards running Waystar. It gets to the point where Kendall refers to himself as the "eldest son" in the Season 3 finale, simply because he never considered for a second that Connor has any sort of status or meaningful influence for him.
In "This is Not for Tears" he is left begging Logan for $100 million because Willa's play left him in serious debt, but Logan's sole condition is that Connor give up his political ambitions, which embarrasses Connor. The same episode has him almost completely forgotten when Gerri mistakenly refers to Kendall as Logan's firstborn son, and when he volunteers to take the fall for the cruises scandal, Logan almost takes pity on him for the useless offer.
Subverted by the end of the series, however: the video of Logan the siblings watch in the finale reveals that, for all Logan's disdain of Connor in terms of his character, business acumen and ruthlessness, he was also the only one of the siblings who Logan used to spend time with doing anything that could be remotely considered father-son bonding. This is reflected in the way he ends the episode itself; he still doesn't get a huge amount of respect and appreciation, but he is also pretty much the only sibling to find himself more or less content with his life. His siblings end the series with pretty much nothing to show for all their machinations and efforts — Kendall's been forced out as CEO, Roman's drowning his sorrows and Shiv is trapped as a trophy wife in an unhappy marriage — he's Happily Married to Willa (or, at least, as happily married as their particular relationship dynamic would allow for) and ready to move on to his next odd whim.
Catchphrase:
"I am the eldest son!"
"Connor Roy was interested in politics from a very young age".
Cloud Cuckoo Lander: Connor is a strange guy. He's completely out of touch with the real world to the extent that it's almost impossible to get him to come down to Earth, he's prone to latching on to odd topics, he has a number of strange political views and is generally out of the way of the rest of the siblings' interests of cut-throat business and politics. When he does randomly decide to run for president, one of his tenets is being against masturbation (which he portrays as a waste of reproductive potential).
Compensated Dating: His "girlfriend" Willa is an escort he pays to date him.
Condescending Compassion: Talks to a Black dancer from Bushwick and assumes that everything has been so hard for him.
Conditioned to Accept Horror: Not as bad as his younger siblings, but Willa is horrified to hear him talk casually about Lester, the sexual abuser Logan didn’t let near his kids, and defend it as a different time.
Control Freak: Connor has a controlling streak, having a meltdown when a party doesn't go his way.
Corrupted Character Copy: Connor can be considered Succession's take on Carmine Lupertazzi - a dimwitted, overlooked, seemingly weak-willed oft-ignored competitor for the throne, who nonetheless proves to be one of the few people with the emotional intelligence and self-understanding to end up with a happy ending. The difference is, Connor is much more dysfunctional and damaged as a result of his upbringing.
Crazy Survivalist: He waxes on about how the world will soon run out of water, and his need to hoard as much of his as possible to be able to sell it.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: As incredulously out of touch as he can be, he still managed to pose a threat to his siblings' plans to elect Mencken as President. For a third-party or independent candidate with views as bizarre as Connor's to split the vote to a degree that mattered is seriously impressive.
Desperately Looking for a Purpose in Life: Connor's wealth has left him completely bored and desperate for something to give him a sense of higher purpose with his run for President all but stated to be because he simply can't think of anything else to do with his time and money.
Disappointing Older Sibling: He is, technically, the oldest Roy child, but he is so dimwitted, weird, weak-willed, and useless that a lot of people forget he factors into the family at all, and the Eldest Child responsibilities have thus been passed onto Logan's second son, Kendall.
Dissonant Serenity: Willa has concerns over how calm he is about Mo being such a presence in his and his siblings’ lives, and he initially thinks “Lester touched all of us” is a funny thing to say in a eulogy. The reporter, too, clearly thinks he'll have privileged and disturbing information.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Connor deconstructs the Upper-Class Twit. Sure, he might have incredible privilege and wealth that allows him to coast through life without ever having to worry about trivial things such as working or paying taxes, but it quickly becomes apparent that Connor has absolutely no clue what to do with his life and isn't taken seriously by anybody because of it. It gets to the point where Connor has to pay a woman to be his girlfriend because he's so Lonely at the Top, and he does things such as attempt to fund Willa's play and decide to run for President on a whim because he's so utterly bored and desperate to be noticed in some regard.
Desperately Craves Affection: He pays for Willa's affection and can't help falling for Logan's emotionally blackmailing, "You're number one," after Kendall breaks free of the leash. Alan Ruck refers to it as Connor is on the inside looking in, both with "the golden trio" and his father.
Dirty Old Man: He’s almost asked to leave the bachelor party because he keeps telling much younger women that he’s in love with them and making them uncomfortable.
Dogged Nice Guy: Gets a little creepy in "Prague" where he's "met a really nice girl" but "she's trying to hide from me".
Drowning My Sorrows: In "Rehearsal", he's in such a slump after Willa expresses doubts about the wedding that he chugs down alcohol and gets so intoxicated that by the end of the night, he's drunkenly singing karaoke in between self-pitying sobs.
Eccentric Millionaire: He's the only character on the show who chooses to enjoy his supreme wealth - mostly by indulging his odd whims and hobbies.
Endearingly Dorky: Wila starts having real affection for him because he's weird in his protectiveness over her.
Entitled to Have You: While they do share some genuine feelings for each other, he would rather Willa stop being a sex worker and stop even just hanging out with other people.
Establishing Character Moment: Connor's first lines are explaining to a child how he's developing a parcel of land and wants to hoard the water on it for himself when the world starts to run out. This touches on Connor's lack of interest in the family business, his mild personality in most situations (talking to a child) and his weird political views.
Felon's Failson: Connor is an out-of-touch "first pancake" who buys Napoleon's penis and stands for President. Commanding a tiny share of the vote, Logan openly tells him at one point that Connor's delusion and stupidity make him "an embarrassment."
Foil:
To Logan, as he’s the oldest sibling, Roman especially makes fun but they have a good relationship, and he tries to be the father figure to the three of them when Logan can’t and has never bothered. He also dates much younger women like Logan does, but some controlling tendencies aside, treats Willa better than Logan does to any woman he’s with (as low a bar as that is).
To Shiv. Both of them start out having lives outside of Logan's orbit, and both are pretty adamant throughout Season 1 that they have no interest in getting involved with Waystar's Succession Crisis. They're also involved in the political sphere, with Shiv starting out as a consultant for left-wing Democrats, and Connor planning a Presidential campaign of his own. However, thanks to Logan already having dismissed Connor as a nobody, Connor remains comfortably distant from the Waystar company politics throughout the entire series, while Shiv is repeatedly pursued and manipulated into coming back into the game, which she eventually does early in Season 2, to her long-term detriment. This is strongly implied to be because unlike Connor, Shiv always had an ambitious and egotistical streak which Logan noticed and preyed upon, while Connor's own character arc, in many respects, shows how Shiv's life may have gone had she remained out of the game. Connor's relationship with Willa also mirrors Shiv's relationship with Tom, as both start off as Unequal Pairings where each partner has an ulterior motive. But while Connor eventually admits to the reality of his relationship and has an honest discussion with Willa about it, Tom and Shiv become increasingly toxic to each other thanks to their inability to work through their issues, with the end result of Shiv being stuck in a loveless marriage where the power dynamics have shifted thanks to Tom becoming CEO.
To Kendall. Both he and Kendall are the eldest boy (he's the actual oldest, but Kendall is the oldest of all of Logan's kids from his second marriage). Kendall was groomed by Logan to become the next CEO from a young age and Connor was neglected by Logan. The attention that was showered on Kendall by Logan however was accompanied with harsh criticism and unyielding expectations, which made Kendall grow up into a man desperate for love and approval from his father and willing to go to extremes for it, even if that means going against him. The neglect Connor experienced as a child forced him to find ways to fill the void on his own, which oddly allowed him to have the closest emotional relationship to Logan. Kendall has a failed marriage and flings, whereas Connor's relationship with his paid escort-girlfriend and eventual wife is the healthiest one in the entire show.
Foolish Sibling, Responsible Sibling: As weird as Connor is, he is at least more responsible than suicidal drug addict Kendall, Mommy Issues Sad Clown Roman and the Awful Wedded Life Shiv.
Half-Sibling Angst: Beyond the age gap, his younger siblings are all from Logan’s second wife and Connor was left out in the cold, constantly being forgotten about as the actual oldest son.
Harmless Villain: He's easily the least effective and malicious of the Roy kids.
Seeing as he generally stays out of the business and doesn’t engage in the morally dubious practices therein, it’s hard to say Connor is even a ‘villain.’
Hidden Depths:
Connor is the least relevant of the Roy siblings, and the family, as a whole, treats him like a joke. But in season 3 he actually shows some depth when Kendall attempts to bring the siblings on his side. He calls them out for ignoring what the family and company were doing on the cruises. His exit from the meeting is followed by the others right after.
He shows some glimmers of self-awareness in "Rehearsal" when he calls out his siblings for being so desperate to please and impress their father despite the fact that it'll never happen, and that he knows full well that he's The Un-Favorite and has made at least some peace with it (though his claim that not needing love is "like a superpower" is heavily implied to be him protesting a bit too much).
Season 4 continues his developing self-awareness particularly after the death of his father: instead of continuing with his delusions of somehow convincing Willa to fall in love with him, he actually sits down and has a serious conversation with her about the exact nature of their relationship. This actually works to strengthen their relationship, as Willa admits that, while she's not in love with him and is marrying him at least partly for financial security, she is nevertheless sufficiently happy with him to be willing to live as his wife.
The above also prompts some growth in how he regards and treats Willa; in the pre-election night episode, on being offered a (less than prestigious) ambassadorship in exchange for dropping out and throwing his support behind Mencken, he actually listens to Willa when she tells him she doesn't really want to live in a third world country and factors that into his decision-making process. While hardly a huge gesture or sacrifice — one of the countries proposed was Somalia, after all — it nevertheless does show a selflessness and willingness to consider his partner's thoughts and feelings on a major life decision rather than just leaping impulsively into a chance to boost his own ego. It's hard to imagine the other Roys acting similarly.
Idle Rich: In contrast to his cutthroat siblings, Connor prefers to live off the money his father has made and involve himself in as little day-to-day events possible. He does occasionally try to do stuff such as invest in his girlfriend's play and even run for President, but it's clear he's completely in over his head, and is only doing those things to feel accomplished about himself.
I Just Want to Be Loved: Defied. In season four, Con tells his siblings off after he attempts to mediate their relationship with Logan, noting they are different from him as they are ‘love sponges’ and he has gotten used to not being loved at all.
I Just Want to Be Special: A lot of his angst comes from feeling left out, and Alan Ruck believes he’s overcompensating out of a need to be more unique than he actually is.
Immediate Self-Contradiction: Frequently, since he's thoroughly lacking in self-awareness.
Connor: Oh, Shiv, you know I don't like to take sides. (beat) But I'm on your side.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: A deluded, pretentious nutjob who occasionally shows off the famous Roy temper, but for the most part Connor is easygoing, personable, and cares about his family while sitting out on all their destructive backstabbing.
Kavorka Man: Downplayed. He's not ugly, but despite being an older, doddering fool, he easily finds himself surrounded by attractive, interesting women, even ones he doesn't have to pay to spend time with. That said, he does end up creeping out quite a few girls at the Prague party during the first season, in part due to trying to follow them around, and also because he keeps asking them where they were on 9/11.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: He thinks simply being well-read makes him intelligent, when it's clear he doesn't understand much of what he says and can't hold up his side in the simplest of debates. He treats his brief conversation with Gil as an epic debate that he won in crushing fashion, when in reality he just slung a few prosaic insults at Gil until Gil walked away, clearly seeing Connor as not worth his time or effort.
Lack of Empathy: Even when reports come out of an active shooter terrorizing the building that all of his siblings and father are at (though it eventually turns out to be an employee's suicide by gunshot), Connor is barely worried at the prospect of them getting hurt, caring more about attending a dead executive's funeral and getting funds for his Presidential campaign.
Locked Out of the Loop: Logan mentions he never had an interest in the business, so he’s just not told what everyone else seems to know. "Vaulter" has him complain that his siblings always march off to daddy and leave him out.
Madonna-Whore Complex: He loves Willa and pays her to be his girlfriend, but is still very fixated on making sure she comes off “clean”, with her past erased.
Manchild: He's the oldest of the Roy siblings by far but is arguably the most immature and sheltered of them all.
May–December Romance: His girlfriend Willa is clearly much younger than he is (their actors are thirty-three years apart).
Mellow Fellow: Unless he's in a Control Freak mode, he is very calm, relaxed and genial.
Mirror Character:
To Roman. Both more on the Republican side of things (Roman wanting a fascist as president, Connor having an interest in phrenology) and having Hates Being Touched and sexual issues. They seem to understand each other, like Shiv and Kendall band together, with Connor going to comfort Roman after Shiv goes too far with the sex jokes. The series finale heavily implies that Roman will end up following in Connor's footsteps and living a life of idle playboy frivolity.
Neutral in Name Only: Although his power is limited (if even remotely existent), Connor routinely says that he doesn't take sides... but he's always on someone's side (Shiv's in particular).
No-Respect Guy: Despite being the most eccentric of the siblings, he has the most self-awareness regarding who he is and the nature of his relationships to others that he ends up being the Only Sane Man. Unfortunately, as much older son of Logan's disparaged first wife, he is never taken seriously by Logan, which in turn makes Kendall, Shiv, and Roman dismissive towards his desires and capabilities. He explodes in the season three finale after Kendall calls himself the eldest, asserting that he’s the eldest son and though he’s tried his best with the trio, they just take advantage of him.
Not So Above It All: Though he claims to not be confrontational and prefers to be neutral, it doesn't take much to get him involved in petty drama. He also is a Control Freak with his own agenda, despite framing himself as the most calm, mature sibling. Plus, he calls out his dad for misogyny, and does generally love Willa, but still pimps her out to further his political ambitions and he's not above making blowjob jokes about his little sister when he wants something from her.
Only Sane Man: Downplayed, as "sane" is a very strong way of putting it. But as eccentric, immature and egotistical as he is, he's arguably the most well-adjusted of the Roy siblings, lacking Roman's immorality and desperation for approval, Shiv's cutthroat attitude and Kendall's serious mental health issues, in addition to having a better understanding than all three of just how damaging their upbringing was. This is no doubt due to Logan viewing Connor as a harmless fool who will never be of real value but is also unlikely to ever do real damage or betray him, so he is content to simply leave him be. For all his kooky ideas and own pretensions (such as his presidential run), he's also the only one who just seems content to enjoy the life of privilege and luxury he already has without desperately trying to stab everyone in the back in an endlessly futile quest for more and more and more. And while his relationship with Willa is clearly transactional, it's also turned out to be easily the happiest, most stable and successful relationship on the show by far (which admittedly is not saying much).
Out of Focus: Of all of Logan's kids, Connor is easily the least relevant on the show. He's thoroughly uninvolved with Waystar's day-to-day operations and is mostly focused on his odd eccentricities, only getting involved with what's going on with the company if he's somehow obligated to do so.
Parental Substitute: They rag him about it, but he was far more of a father figure for Kendall, Roman and Shiv than Logan.
Please, Don't Leave Me: He begs Willa to stay at the house for a while after the shitty therapy, calling love a virus and hoping maybe she'll catch it.
Powerful People Are Subs: Asks Willa to slap him out of nowhere, and when she does, he calls her the best girlfriend in the world.
Preemptive Apology: In “Nobody Is Ever Missing”, when Logan asks the kids to have a chat, he brings Kendall in and apologises in advance for the ripping to shreds he’s about to get.
Practically Different Generations: He's easily over 10 years older than his half-siblings (Alan Ruck is twenty-two years older than Jeremy Strong, twenty-six years older than Kieran Culkin and thirty-one years older than Sarah Snook). In the past this meant he had to act somewhat paternally (in his words, "[Logan] couldn't be bothered"); in the present, he has a fairly estranged relationship with them.
Promotion to Parent: He deludes himself early on that he can fix anything, and really tried in the past to be a parent to his little siblings, but kindness becomes so alien to them that they lash out at him instead.
Secret-Keeper: Judging by his telling Shiv her “someday you’ll have to fuck something” joke was low, it’s likely he knows the cause of Roman’s sex issues more than the other two.
Shoo Out the Clowns: Connor is mostly a comedic character, who does not meaningfully contribute to the main story due to not being closely involved in the family business. Many dramatic scenes do not have Connor present, with one memorable example being Kendall confessing to his other two siblings that he was an accessory to manslaughter in Season 3, after Kendall had enraged Connor into leaving the event with an insensitive comment about being the oldest son.
Strawman Political: Connor holds very libertarian political beliefs, which are portrayed as hypocritical and absurd, as Connor attempts to adopt a "salt-of-the-earth," rural, working class image to go with it. It's just another way to show how out of touch he is.
Quit Your Whining: Tells Kendall off in the season three finale, thinking he's suicidal and being a pain in the ass simply because he's a Spoiled Brat who didn't get the CEO job.
Rape as Backstory: All the Roy children freak out in their own way about Mo and the wolf pack, but Connor especially defends it as a “different time” and has some “memory gems” of Mo that he doesn’t want to talk about.
Rich Boredom: It's heavily implied that his activities, including his attempt to run for President, are just his way of filling the gap his siblings have with their careers.
Rich Recluse's Realm: While all of his siblings live in apartments (in the centre of New York), Connor has a huge ranch in New Mexico. It's normal enough there, but he owns it because he's planning for the inevitable collapse of society and he controls a water source that runs through the property, so he's planning to turn it into one of these.
Sex Is Evil, and I Am Horny: He pays Willa to be his girlfriend more than anything sexual, and one of the campaigns he wants to run on is anti-masturbation. He also tells this to Roman, whose Hates Being Touched issues are well-known.
Sheltered Aristocrat: Connor has never been in a position where he was required to think about anything (especially not the welfare of other people) or do any work, so — unlike the rest of the Roy family, who benefit from Logan's nepotism but still run themselves ragged in their jobs — he's grown up into a clueless, naive dilettante that does everything electively, as a hobby. This includes his presidential ambitions and political platform, which are conservative in the sense that they're informed by his own perspective as a wealthy man, but otherwise a grab bag of bizarre fixations (such as anti-masturbation) that only appeal to other eccentrics.note  Curiously, however, this is arguably what makes him (marginally) more well-adjusted than his siblings; while they run themselves ragged trying desperately to impress a man who will never respect them and to seize power and authority they neither deserve nor are really cut out for, he's ultimately just content to live a cushy, protected life within the 1% where he gets to sit back and relax in luxury while fulfilling his odd little whims whenever the need takes him.
Skewed Priorities: He has zero control over his life, got his father's love passed over him for three younger children from a different mother and is forgotten about most of the time, so he'll act like cold butter at the ball is the worst thing ever.
Small Name, Big Ego: He has a very oversized view of his intellect and capabilities. In season two, he genuinely believes he has a shot at becoming president and would be capable in such a position, a notion which others try to disabuse him of with limited success.
Stalker with a Crush: Subtle, but in "Rehearsal" he's revealed to regularly monitor Willa's every move via a tracking app he put on her phone without her knowledge.
Team Switzerland: He claims to be this, as he doesn't factor into the show's central conflict and repeatedly states that he doesn't take sides (only to then promptly take someone's side).
Token Good Teammate: Downplayed as he certainly has his own issues, but Connor is the only one who avoids the backstabbing and betrayal the rest of the family engage in and is probably the nicest on a personal level.
The Un-Favorite: Due to his rather... odd demeanor and ambitions, as well as the age gap between him and the rest of his siblings, he's usually completely forgotten about, and tolerated at best. Despite being Logan's firstborn son, Logan considers him a complete nonfactor. Strangely enough, this means that Logan tends to treat him with more kindness than his other children since he's so clearly harmless. The finale supports interpretation when the siblings watch a video of Logan relaxing and enjoying the company of the people who are closest to being actual friends; Connor is the only one of the siblings who is present, and even manages to get away with some very mild teasing of his father. Weirdly enough, the fact that Connor is the unfavorite child may somehow make him the favorite.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: He accidentally escalates the conflict between Kendall and Logan on two separate occasions:
In Season 1, he mistakenly assumes that Kendall intends to announce Logan's retirement at the RECNY gala and informs Logan of the fact. Logan then usurps Kendall's speech and announces that he's staying on as CEO. Kendall, who had merely wanted to make a "he will never retire" joke, is upset at the turn of events and his father's general lack of trust in him, which leads him to try and stage a coup several episodes later.
At the end of Season 2, he makes fun of Greg for turning down a $250 million offer from Ewan; Greg then outfits Kendall with the cruise scandal documents that Kendall can use to bring his father down.
Upper-Class Twit: Oh yes. He's as rich as the rest of the siblings but easily the dumbest and most out-of-touch due to his incredible privilege, and he adamantly refuses to contribute much of anything to society.
White Sheep: Less than he thinks of himself as being but Connor is probably the most well-meaning and harmless of the Roy siblings and seems content to just enjoy the enormous luxury his privileged life has afforded him.