Advertised Extra: He is given main character credit in both seasons, but has very little plot importance and appears in about a third of the episodes in both and disappears for long periods of time.
Back for the Finale: Subverted. Although his name is frequently mentioned during the series finale, he never appears and turns out to be a Red Herring.
Big Bad Wannabe: He smugly boasts that he'll eat Kendall and the Roys one by one. This never comes to fruition, with the only time he's shown to hurt anyone being a passive example of not siding with Kendall's vote of no confidence. In fact, it's later shown that Lawrence's company isn't as hot as it first seems to be, which causes it to be gutted quickly into Season 2, much to his chagrin.
But Not Too Gay: While he is shown in bed with a man and takes a man, presumably his husband, to meet Roman, he's never shown engaging in anything physical or even discussing his personal life. Could be considered justified in that the show doesn't often depict romantic or sexual interactions between anyone (save for a single love scene between Kendall and Rava), let alone a character with such minimal screentime.
Commuting on a Bus: He is ostensibly a member of the main cast in Season 1, but he gets very little screen time in either season and is absent from the plot for large chunks of time.
Demoted to Extra: Almost right away. The start of the show makes him out to be a major antagonistic role, but he then falls out of focus and becomes a secondary character before exiting the show altogether.
Inscrutable Oriental: He makes his disdain clear to Kendall in private, but he doesn't want to be part of Waystar Royco and it means that he presents himself as totally unreadable to them.
Kick Them While They Are Down: In the first episode, he is the one to tell Kendall that his father has just had a brain hemorrhage. While Kendall reels in shock, Lawrence delivers the kicker: "You invited me into the chicken coop, and without Daddy involved, I'm going to eat you one by fucking one."
Laser-Guided Karma: Lawrence gets cold feet and betrays Kendall at the vote against Logan, causing Kendall to be fired and spurring his downward spiral. This of course results in Kendall finding his way back under his dad’s influence, personally acting on his father’s orders to gut Lawrence’s company.
Not So Stoic: When Waystar starts looking to mess with Vaulter’s books and Kendall hints that Logan is trying to strip the company, Lawrence is visibly shaken and nervous. After Kendall guts Vaulter on his dad’s order Lawrence devolves into confused anger.
Put on a Bus: After only having a rather secondary presence in Season 1, he's almost immediately taken out of the picture in Season 2.
Rage Breaking Point: He’s usually pretty calm, even when he and Kendall are spitting venom at each other, but when Kendall closes Vaulter down because Logan told him to, he’s stunned and yelling in disbelief.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: To Kendall, who he has a very testy relationship with.
Smug Snake: Lawrence has this personality in certain business altercations.
Straight Gay: He is shown in bed with a man when Kendall calls him during night hours and brings him to a bar with Roman. (It is, however, also possible he is bisexual).
Tech Bro: He's a fairly young man who runs a huge digital media company that Kendall acquires, but possesses a heft of quiet confidence as well as regarding the Roys as shallow dinosaurs.
Twofer Token Minority: Asian and non-heterosexual.
Visual Metaphor: He tells Kendall that he'd never do business with the Roys, then steps into the elevator and rubs sanitizer on his hands, literally washing his hands of the family.