Alas, Poor Villain: Villain may be a stretch, but Jamie was easily the most sympathetic and biggest Tragic Villain in the series. He was used, abused and mistreated by John and everyone on the Yellowstone ranch his whole life and never was able to live the life he wanted. In the end Beth gets to kill him and rub it in his face as he dies by her and Rip's hands as he bleeds out. The worse part is he never got to see his son ever again and give him the love he was never given.
Ambiguously Gay: Before he courts and marries Christina, Beth accuses him of being this, leading him to counter that he's being celibate because he isn't sure if he's ready to start a family and bring a child into the world.
Anti-Villain: Becomes practically a textbook example halfway through Season 5. The constant abuse from the Duttons, the snub by John in the governor race, the cruelty from Beth, being forced to kill his father, and the threats from Beth against his son drive him to become an antagonist to the ranch. His antagonism is completely justified. He's practically a villain only narratively. He even has the foresight to understand that his unhinged sister will attempt to have him killed, and makes plans to counter her. But it's not enough in the end thanks to Beth's Batman Gambit.
Berserk Button: When Sarah Nguyen gleefully tells him that she's going to take apart the ranch with her feature story on the corruption in Montana, Jamie snaps, attacking and then strangling her to death.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: John was a horrible father to Jamie and never gave him an ounce of love. Here, Jamie gives his son nothing but love and kindness and wishes for him to be raised right.
Butt-Monkey: Jamie repeatedly gets talked down to, insulted and even hit by members of his family, including Beth (who outright tells him to kill himself more than once and harbors a seemingly irrational hatred for him) and John (who kicks him out of the ranch when he doesn't drop his bid to be Attorney General). This gets Deconstructed when Jamie decides that he’s had enough of the mistreatment and turns against his tormentors.
Cain and Abel: The Abel to Beth's Cain - relatively so. Beth goes to the extreme to torture Jamie, forcing him to kill his own father at the end of season 4. Jamie is the lowest in the Dutton Clan, at best treated like an outcast, and at worst insulted and abused on a consistent basis. All because he's Harvard-educated, even though he did exactly as his father asked. And John can't even come up with a good reason why he hates Jamie so much, defaulting to adoption(which he himselfs says is not a good reason, as he always considers Jamie his son).
Calling the Old Man Out: He attempts this in Season 3 against John after learning that the latter adopted him as a child, and he's not related to the Duttons by blood. It... doesn't work.
Destroy the Evidence: With Sarah Atwood's murder by hitmen, and him having provoked the Helena PD to get a search warrant for his house, he panics and shreds any paperwork that would tie him to her and Market Equities to save his own neck, and knows that he'll squeal about the Train Station if they arrest him.
The Dog Bites Back: He has done this two times in Season 5:
The first time is when Beth gets arrested after instigating a bar brawl in Bozeman. Jamie gets the other instigator (an out-of-towner who goaded Beth into attacking her) to drop the charges... but agrees to have Beth charged with Disorderly Conduct and sentenced to community service. He has to stop himself from laughing when she walks out of the police station complaining about having to pick up "garbage on the freeway in my spare time".
The second time is during the midseason finale where Jamie gives Beth a well deserved "The Reason You Suck" Speech. Jamie says to Beth that her blackmail against him is useless, is well aware that Beth knows John’s actions brings more harm than good for the ranch but isn’t able to convince John otherwise, and knows how he plans to remove John as a threat to the ranch, while Beth can’t do anything about it. He’s also aware that Beth will try to have him killed, leading him to plan his own assassination on her.
Driven to Suicide: Attempts this after killing Sarah Nguyen, only to be stopped by John before he can carry through with the act.
Evil Parents Want Good Kids: He's the only Dutton family member who wishes for his son to be raised outside of Yellowstone. To that end, he does his best to ensure he's raised far away from the rest of his messed-up family members and their toxic behavior.
Extreme Doormat: Jamie is pretty much a doormat in every sense of the word for the Dutton clan and those around him. Jamie acts like a spineless coward and almost never stands up for himself. People repeatedly walk all over him and take advantage, with Jamie always on the receiving end of another beatdown, physical or emotional. Though by Season 5 Jamie is starting to shed this trope by growing a spine.
Fiction as Cover-Up: Functionally does this in order to protect the family's interests after Hendon's actions cause the deaths of two thieves early in the series, staging it as a drunk-driving car crash both thieves were involved in (and even meeting the victim's father and convincing him of the story).
Freudian Excuse: He was abused and treated like a pariah by John and everyone in the ranch, resulting in Jamie's massive insecurities and lack of confidence in himself.
Grew a Spine: After spending the whole series being an Extreme Doormat to the Dutton’s abuse, he finally stands up to his adoptive family’s abuse, first by publicly calling for John’s impeachment, then by giving a "The Reason You Suck" Speech towards Beth on how her blackmail material is useless against him and knows that John is a threat to the Dutton Ranch and Jamie plans to stop him.
Guilt Complex: Heavily implied that the reason why Jamie is so ineffectual is the massive amount of guilt he's carrying from the botched hysterectomy on Beth. He finally tells Beth that giving her to the clinic was the greatest regret of his life. Unfortunately, she doesn't care.
Ivy League for Everyone: John convinced him to go to Harvard as a young adult, with the plot implying that the former pulled some strings to get admission for the latter. This had the knock-on effect of alienating Jamie from most of the ranchers, as they consider him to be an outsider compared to the rest of the family.
Jerkass Has a Point: Jamie may be spineless at times and trying to act on his own, but, being a lawyer, he makes valid points when he tries to get through others:
When John demands he steps down as Attorney General, Jamie rightfully calls him out on being such an Ungrateful Bastard that he's done everything for John and the ranch and has earned this. Even Rip, who was present, can't help but admit he's got a point.
Jamie even has something of a right to be angry with John for not revealing Jamie was really adopted until well into adulthood after Jamie had to find out for himself. It doesn't help that Beth's admittedly valid reason for hating him isn't revealed for a couple seasons, making it just come off as irrational.
Jamie calls out Beth for her blackmail against him is useless, rightfully pointing out he's been trying to protect the ranch all along (bringing up his unsuccessful campaign to have Market Equities build an airport in the region in Season 3), and that for all of Beth's machinations against him, she has no legitimate right to the ranch — invoking both Tate and his own son's inheritance of the property in the process.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Jamie is a pushover, who has done some shady things for the Dutton family for most of his life. However, for all his faults, deep down Jamie truly wishes to be a good person, tries to do the right thing, and, after becoming a father himself, is a good loving parent to his son.
My God, What Have I Done?:
His murder of Sarah Nguyen is enough to send him into a state of depression for several weeks (or months), both due to the fact that it was the first time he was shown snapping and for leading him to lose Christina.
Being forced to shoot his own father, Garrett at the end of Season 4, and the fallout that comes alongside it, is enough to leave him stunned when he discovers Beth will use it as Blackmail material against him.
The ultimate realization that his flippant comment ("What if I wanna play offense?") to Sarah midway through Season 5 ultimately caused her to arrange for John's death ultimately leads to him break down sobbing at the realization.
My Greatest Failure: Openly admits that his greatest regret in his life was sending Beth off to the clinic.
Pet the Dog:
He's very kind towards his nephew, Tate. He even declares to Beth that he wants to ensure that the ranch gets passed down to Tate and his children.
While they don't interact much, he considers Rip a friend, something Rip was actually grateful for the gesture, who proceeds to defend Jamie whenever John abuses him.
Posthumous Villain Victory: He dies in the finale at the hands of Beth. However, even in death, he managed to at least get some closure: John is dead, the Yellowstone ranch is gone, and the family was forced to sell it to pay for their bills and managed to secure his son being safe and raised far away from any of the Duttons and forever ruined the Dutton family name as a final act of defiance for everything they've done to him and countless others.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Jamie gives a pretty cathartic one to Beth after having enough of her abuse, revealing to her that if she leaks info on where his father's body is, that will lead to the police finding all the bodies John put there. Then, he calls her out for how she knows that the ranch business will fail, and that she is only going along with John's plans out of denial. He also makes it clear that he's going to be passing the ranch on to both Tate and his children, reasserting his place in the family, and there's nothing she can do about it. Her only response is to give him petty insults, and later trying to make John murder Jamie.
Sibling Rivalry: With Beth, who he considers to be misanthropic and self-destructive, while she considers him to be weak and ineffectual. The deep-rooted cause of their antagonistic relationship is only revealed later on in Season 3.
Tragic Villain: Jamie's life is nothing but constant abuse and neglect well into adulthood. Even with his efforts to earn his families love and respect, it never amounts to anything. So it's a little hard not to root for him when he turns on them in the final season and ruin their public name forever.
Trauma Conga Line: Of the main characters, he easily suffers many repeated indignities, ranging from several My God, What Have I Done? moments over the death of other characters, being blackmailed into shooting his own father at the end of Season 4, learning that he isn't actually a member of the Duttons, just adopted and plenty of other moves by other characters designed to keep him under their thumb.
The Un-Favorite: While Beth was this for her own mother, Jamie is this for the entire family—except Kayce—being repeatedly insulted, cajoled and mocked by nearly every other member of the clan for not fitting in with the rest of the ranchers and being Harvard-educated.