Abusive Parents: Exclusively to Jamie, his adopted son. He makes it very clear that Jamie's only value to him is that he's the ranch's legal representation, and allows Beth's physical abuse of him. At the end of Season 4, however, he gets a Pet the Dog moment where he realizes the ramifications of letting Beth functionally Blackmail Jamie over the murder of his real father, and comments that he still loves him regardless. Double-subverted later, that John goes right back to abusing Jamie like always and robbing him of his efforts to be Governor out of spite.
All for Nothing: John ruled Yellowstone for decades as had his ancestors for more than a century. By the time of the final season, he is killed by assassins to make it look like a suicide; his name is forever ruined by Jamie, who he abused his whole life; Beth and Kayce end up having to sell all the equipment and animals on the ranch to pay for their debts and Kayce ends up selling the ranch itself to Rainwater. Because of John's own pride and stubbornness, he effectively loses the ranch, his life, and his family's legacy, rendering all of his actions throughout his entire life in utter vain .Unfortunately, he doesn't live long enough to see how badly he screwed up.
All Take and No Give: John’s relationship with Jamie is this. Despite Jamie doing everything John wanted him to, including becoming a lawyer, John himself never does anything for Jamie, and always considers Jamie his biggest disappointment despite Jamie never having done anything to warrant such disapproval. The lack of respect results in Jamie going against him, declaring John’s impeachment from being Governor.
Asshole Victim: For those outside Yellowstone Ranch and the Dutton family itself, at least. John dies in the second half of Season 5, with the scene staged by professional hitmen to look like he took his own life. Given his hypocrisy , abusive and criminal track record over throughout the series , there aren't many people outside his family and direct associates who are surprised by his death. Exemplified when Sarah Atwood tells Jamie to stop crying when he has a My God, What Have I Done? moment after tacitly suggesting Sarah use her contacts to have John killed.
Badass in Distress:
One episode has him fall down suddenly at the ranch, causing the ranch-hands to hurriedly get him to the on-site veterinarian — where it's revealed that he's ruptured his ulcer (presumably due to stress over the repeated machinations of power players trying to seize control of the property).
A series of episodes follows his diagnosis and treatment of colon cancer, which causes him significant concern.
The Season 4 premiere has him nearly die after being shot multiple times by members of the militia, prompting him to spend the next two months in the hospital.
Berserk Button: If anyone on this show has learned one consistent lesson, it's that it's a bad, bad idea to threaten any member of his family, as the Montana Free Militia learns (with fatal consequences during Season 3 and the opening of Season 4).
Commander Contrarian: He can definitely be this whenever he interacts with outsiders. Name one scene where John doesn't vehemently disagree with people not from Montana. Oh right, you can't, because he never agrees or even concedes. This can even get to the point where John disregards things about ranching just so he can disagree with "political types". For example, he disagrees with installing solar panels because it will destroy sage grass in the process. Sage grass is one of the most useless plants to grow in pastures, which all ranchers know. Note
Deconstruction: Of The Patriarch. Badass head of the Duttons and owner of Yellowstone Ranch, fighting against the corrupt forces out to steal all that his family built up that he is, it becomes clear as the series progresses that he was only able to do so by becoming just as vicious as his enemies, if not moreso, and this is implicitly shown to not be a good thing at all, especially with the trail of bodies piling up at the "train station" over the years, leaving the family with a feared reputation in Yellowstone Valley which gives them few willing allies outside of the ranch. His rule of the Dutton family and the ranch is also particularly iron-fisted, with little to no compromise when it comes to his methods thanks to his stubbornness and pride refusing to let him give a little to gain a lot, and that same lack of compromise extends to his children on family matters, causing no end of dysfunction and strife among and between them. All of these elements come to a head by the end of the show, serving to tear the Dutton family apart and sink their reputation permanently.
Death by Irony: He told Jamie that suicide is the most shameful thing a man can do while trying very little to talk him out of it. Come Season 5B has John dying making it look like a suicide indirectly because of Jamie by Sarah Attwood.
Doting Grandparent: He dotes on his grandson Tate in a way he never treated his own kids.
Double Standard: John has quite a few of these, mostly concerning the actions of his family.
Beth is allowed to physically abuse Jamie. If Jamie fights back, he's the one in the wrong. The most John does is ask at one point for Beth to "take it easy on him", but he doesn't push it when she refuses.
Jamie attempting suicide earns him a condescending speech from John about how it's selfish, but Beth admitting to trying to push Jamie to suicide earns her no ire from John.
His views of coastal elites is a clear double standard, and seems to come out of denial that he himself is a member of the elite. Basically, every flaw John applies to outsiders is something the Duttons do as well, just in a rural setting.
Dropped a Bridge on Him: He's murdered by a hitman and has his death set up to look like a suicide in the first episode of Season 5B, all entirely offscreen. It's a rather anticlimactic end for such an important character, and necessitated because Kevin Costner had left the series.
Enemy Mine:
Puts aside his differences with Rainwater and Jenkins (even hosting a sit-down meeting where they all comment that Even Evil Has Standards) to ally and go after the Beck clan as a united front.
He also puts aside his differences with Rainwater so they can go after Market Equities together in Season 3.
Establishing Character Moment: The very first scene of the show exemplifies his philosophy and power — he is first seen consoling a mortally-wounded horse after he was involved in a major auto accident that mangled another vehicle. After performing a Mercy Kill on the horse, he finds a note Foreshadowing a threat to the valley, then comments on his I Did What I Had to Do tendencies ("the things we do to keep you fed") to a group of cows on the ranch, while a pair of officers arrive at the scene and are shown practically gawking at John, who they refer to as the "Commissioner".
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: John cannot understand why Jamie would ever want to turn on him no matter how many times Jamie is abused by him or Beth. This is in spite of the fact John is an Ungrateful Bastard towards Jamie his whole life and never gives anything in return while justifying that he's earned the right to be his father. Even when he's impeached by Jamie for governor, John is angry and still cannot understand why Jamie would do this, overlooking how he deliberately robbed him of this title out of spite and because of his belief Jamie would humiliate him. This flaw would eventually lead to his death due to Jamie indirectly getting him killed.
Evil Is Petty: His treatment of Jamie is needlessly cruel and hypocritical. The final season deconstructs this, that Jamie becomes fed up with John's behavior and has him impeached which has massive repercussions for the Dutton family as a whole, destabilizing the family and ranch and thus ruining John's efforts to protect the ranch.
Everyone Can See It: Part of the reason why he gives his blessing for Rip to marry Beth — Rip is Like a Son to Me, and he's well aware of their romance (even if everyone else knows about it, but refuses to tell him about it).
Fake Shemp: In Season 5B, when Kayce glimpses his corpse in the bathroom of the Governor's residence, it's clearly played by a stand-in for Kevin Costner — his head is never seen, with his body glimpsed from the torso. The justification is that John was Driven to Suicide (or rather, had his death staged to look like one), and the camera is simply utilizing a Gory Discretion Shot. Furthermore, the scene later in the season that shows his assassination has the stand-in playing John as well. Throughout the scene, the area is dark and John is never shown from any angle other than the back.
Fatal Flaw:
Pride. John is unbearably stubborn and unwilling to back down from selling the ranch to honor the promise he made to his father years ago. He's aware that the ranch isn't making any real money, yet he refuses to accept his old cowboy ways aren't helping the ranch, but are ruining it because of his pride and refusal to compromise in making money other ways. Jamie even lampshades this, rightfully pointing out that John is the biggest threat to the ranch because of his pride. Even Beth, the most loyal of the Duttons, is begrudgingly forced to accept that when Jamie points this out, since John refused to accept a deal to sell parts of the land, which would have given them half a billion dollars in profit but John keeps refusing solely out of pride and to honor his father's last wishes.
His god-awful treatment of Jamie and abuse of him. Jamie has done everything John has asked of him, yet John never even tries to return his hard work and does nothing but act like an Entitled Bastard to Jamie most of the time. Even worse is that Jamie was adopted which makes John's abuse to Jamie both needlessly cruel and hypocritical. This flaw leads to his own undoing, when Jamie, finally fed up with John's abuse, has him impeached as Governor and forever ruins his public image.
Hypocrite:
He frequently calls out Jamie for being selfish and only caring about himself and not the ranch, yet most (if not all) of John's actions are either for himself or for the ranch. Best shown when he becomes governor of Montana, he functionally abdicated his responsibilities in the first few days to go on a trip to capture and brand cattle, and has all but ignored the advice of every one of his advisors.
He chastises Beth for getting Summer arrested, stating: "We don't kill sheep, we kill wolves." But clearly, what John considers "a wolf" is pretty wishy-washy. In the second episode, he orders Rip to murder a mortician to destroy evidence, whose only crime was having a very dangerous addiction to formaldehyde.
Hoist by His Own Petard:
For all his abusive and cruel behavior towards Jamie, the latter finally has had enough of John's bullshit in Season 5 and has him impeached as governor and reveals John's dirty secrets to the world.
Despite John's insistence on holding on to the land as his ancestors once did, it is his own pride, delusions and dedication to the values of the past that ultimately allows those values to become outdated and in some ways dangerous. By the end of the series, it all comes undone. All the ranch hands leave when he's gone. Kayce and Beth sell all the livestock and equipment bought over the years as their political and economic power evaporate due to Market Equities//Jamie (who was damaged by John's delusions of cowboys having "morals and values" while disdaining the elite, of which he was a part and abused the fact, whenever it suited him) finding problems with their taxes/legal problems. Kayce himself plans to sell the Ranch to Rainwater in defiance of his father's wishes.
I Gave My Word: The entire series is motivated by his philosophy — he promised his father that he would uphold the values of the ranch and keep it in the Dutton family, and everything he does (from getting into physical conflict with enemies to political machinations) is in support of that goal. Even when Market Equities offers a massive cash offer in Season 4 (and Beth advises him to take it, noting the consequences of not doing so), he steadfastly refuses to budge, citing this trope.
I Own This Town: Numerous references in the first season indicate that previous generations more-or-less built Yellowstone Valley into what it is, and the enemies that try to go up against his family realize very quickly why it is a bad idea to take him on. To note, early on in the first season, Dan Jenkins speaks to an investor about suing John, only to be told (in no uncertain terms) "there isn't a jury in this state that would convict John Dutton".
Irrational Hatred: Of Jamie, his adopted son. Jamie has done everything John has asked of him his whole life in spite of the fact he never wanted to be a lawyer, yet John continues to abuse and mistreat Jamie on a regular basis that is both needlessly cruel and hypocritical. Worse is that John is aware of this behavior, yet he never does anything to change himself and continues to abuse Jamie well into adulthood. Due to John's antagonism with Jamie's birth father implies this abusive behavior stems from Jamie reminding him of his father and John cruelly abusing Jamie due to him.
It's All About Me: John does care for his family and the ranch, but he's dead-set on the idea that only doing things his way will work, while any alternative is doomed for failure, which only serves to cultivate the dysfunction and toxicity within the family. Even his actions becoming governor of Montana is primarily so to use the power to gain control over the ranch and use his position for his own benefit — ignoring the advice of everyone around him, even his own family.
It's Personal:
He does not take threats to his ranch or his family quietly. Unless his pride gets in the way.
When Malcolm and Teal Beck kidnap John's grandson Tate, John goes after them and eventually shoots and kills both men, as the latter tries to flee.
Jerkass: John is capable of being reasonable to his family and occasionally shows love to them, but he's massively toxic in his relationship with all of them. He's rude, selfish and downright cruel toward Jamie for no reason other than he feels he deserves it, manipulates others around him for his own benefit, and basically manipulates his entire family for his own benefit uncaring of their opinions most of the time.
Jurisdiction Friction: With Kayce, after the latter defers livestock officers to help Rainwater (giving his tribe authority to martial them) while investigating the disappearance of a native woman — and drawing ire from John in the process, who initially refused to support the motion.
Karmic Death: When Jamie tries to kill himself early on in the series, John coldly tells him that suicide is the most shameless thing a man can do. Come Season 5B, John dies exactly the way Jamie tried to via a staged suicide. Even worse is that Jamie, the man John emotionally abused for much of his life, indirectly got him killed.
Karma Houdini Warranty: John ruled the Yellowstone ranch for decades with an iron fist and killing countless people in cold blood while screwing up his family beyond repair because of his pride and selfishness. By the final season Jamie, the son he's abused his whole life, has him impeached as governor, his name forever ruined, and dies making it look like a suicide. Worse is by the series finale, Beth and Kayce sell the ranch and the Dutton family name is forever ruined because of John's own delusional pride making his life's work in vain.
Kick the Dog: He allows Beth to abuse Jamie knowing he didn't deserve any sort of abuse and even declaring he will kill Jamie, all for defending himself from Beth's assaults, and refusing to say he loves Jamie is the worst of John's actions.
Killed Offscreen: His murder in Season 5B happens offscreen, and is only revealed after the fact.
Lack of Empathy: John rarely is able to show empathy, to which even when he does, it's usually for the ranch. Very rarely will it be genuine love or friendship, but at the end of the day, in his eyes, the ranch comes before anything else.
The Millstone: This is how Jamie sees him by Season 5, and secretly, so does Beth. Jamie calls Beth out for knowing that John is the problem with the ranch, and for doing little to stop him. They both know that John's outdated views and inability to change will eventually destroy them.
Moral Myopia: His morality hinges mostly on himself and the ranch, to the point that he seems to forget the bad things his family has done. During the meeting with Rainwater and Jenkins, he remarks that his family has never crossed the line of attacking their families. This obviously negates how Beth screwed with Jenkins' marriage to break him emotionally, and several other schemes that hinge on ruining people's lives.
Nepotism: To the extent that he gets his son, Kayce, hand-picked as the new Livestock Commissioner after having to "fall on his sword" early on in the series, and has Jamie installed as the new Attorney General of Montana. Given the amount of power he wields (his Establishing Character Moment has police officers defer to him as he investigates a fatal crash), this was to be expected.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: After Foreshadowing a dream he had about stopping to help a woman and her son who were stuck at the side of a road with a flat tire, he faces that exact same scenario at the end of Season 3— and for his efforts, he's (non-fatally) shot by a member of the Montana Free Militia, who were stalking him as part of an assassination contract, while the woman he was trying to help is shot in the back.
Not-So-Well-Intentioned Extremist: All his actions have been for the sake of the ranch and his family, but it's blatantly obvious that he's done far more harm to the ranch because of his pride and unwillingness to listen to change his ways only causes more and more problems for his family and the ranch as a whole. Jamie in the end of the first half of Season 5 even lampshades this, that John is the biggest threat to the ranch because of his refusal to listen to others.
Parental Substitute: He's functionally a father figure to Rip, who looks up to and respects him far more so than his real father. Although John is hesitant to accept it at first, he eventually admits that Rip is Like a Son to Me (before he becomes his son-in-law after marrying Beth).
Parent with New Paramour:
The series starts with an example of this, as John (after years of pining for his deceased wife Evelyn) is maintaining a relationship with Governor Lynette Perry as the season begins.
In Season 4, he starts a relationship with Summer after helping her skirt the charges from the protest she was involved in.
The Patriarch: More-or-less rules Yellowstone Ranch with an iron fist (though he's very compassionate towards his family, particularly the youngest members), and much of the series is motivated by his quest to keep the property out of the hands of infringing developers or power-players.
Posthumous Villain Victory: Zigzagging. Despite getting killed, John won in the end. His murder sets off a chain of events that leads to the ruin of Market Equities' plans, his surviving children and their children will live on, and the Yellowstone ends up in the hands of the tribe and declared a wilderness area, ensuring that it will never get resold or developed by anyone. But that wasn't even remotely thanks to him, and the Dutton family would never again own any part of Yellowstone, which was definitely not what he wanted.
Pragmatic Villainy: His sole reason for even keeping Jamie around and talking him out of his suicide is because he needs a lawyer on the inside, not out of love for his son.
Real Life Writes the Plot: A combination of production struggles and Kevin Costner's unavailability to shoot episodes (due to filming Horizon: An American Saga), as noted on the Trivia page, meant that production had to proceed without his involvement. As such, John Dutton is Killed Offscreen at the beginning of Season 5B.
Screw the Money, I Have Rules!: To a T. Much of the conflict throughout the series is motivated by his decision to keep the ranch in the family rather than selling it and letting his family live comfortably on the proceeds, because of the responsibility he feels to the family who passed the ranch down to him.
Underestimating Badassery: As exemplified repeatedly in the series, John often runs up against people who presume him to be a simple rancher who will fold at the first drop of pressure – unaware that he not only has the political connections to make life difficult for any threats (though still retaining a degree of civility), but that he has the combat skills to match.
Ungrateful Bastard: John’s this to Jamie. John never shows any gratitude for the things Jamie has done to help the Dutton family. This ends up being deconstructed for John when Jamie turns against him and calls for John’s impeachment. He can't even give a reason as to why Jamie gets his hatred other then feeling that he's not his real son and that he dislikes Jamie became a lawyer, never understanding that he was forced into becoming a lawyer by John himself when Jamie wanted to stay on the farm.
Villain Protagonist: Zig-zagged. A good argument could be made that John Dutton is a classic example of a Villain Protagonist, complete with a Sympathetic P.O.V. to rope the audience in to rooting for him. After all, being the patriarch of a cowboy mafia doesn't help. That said most of John's enemies are just as bad as him (if not worse), bring the show to a Grey-and-Gray Morality conflict. However, John is never portrayed as in the right for keeping to The Old Ways, while his grandfather and great-grandfather are always paragons for trying to be more compassionate while acknowledging their wrongs and understanding that while the ranch is important, the family is more important then any material possession: if they became a dysfunctional family, then what was the point in moving?