The Ace: There isn't much Jack can't do: he's a tremendously gifted surgeon, he's in excellent physical shape, he's an untrained but effective physical fighter, he's fearless in the face of immediate danger, he's incredibly handsome, he's an able strategist and women are drawn to his competent, compassionate nature. As the events of the show progress, he becomes a Broken Ace, detailed below.
Action Genre Hero Guy: Aside from being a doctor, Jack meets nearly every requirement for this trope and maintains that image for four seasons. It's subverted starting in Season 5 when he starts subscribing to Locke's faith in the Island, and much like Locke, starts allowing himself to be led by signs and symbols.
After-Action Patch-Up: His first meeting with Kate is this; following the crash, he's left with a superficial but potentially serious wound that he can't reach himself. He enlists Kate, who happens to be walking by, to help stitch him up. They bond during this moment, setting up their relationship which would continue to develop and grow across six seasons.
Agent Scully: Jack is a man of science; he believes in logic and the rational, even as the mysterious happenings on the island pile up. He reaches a point of pure delusion in the Season 4 finale: the Island disappears right before his eyes and he still desperately tries to deny it happened.
The Alcoholic: Prior to the crash (and even afterwards) Jack could take or leave a drink, but after being rescued he gradually comes apart psychologically as the Island tries to draw him back. To cope, he starts drinking heavily and abusing prescription medication, even writing prescriptions for himself by forging his father's signature.
All for Nothing: All of Jack's efforts to get everyone off the Island in the first four seasons ends with only him and five others making it off before the Island moves with everyone else still on it. After Locke's death triggers his guilt complex, the guilt at his failure starts to eat away at him until he becomes an alcoholic wreck.
Ambiguously Trained: Despite being a surgeon by trade, Jack needs no instruction on how to use a gun, as well as proving quite capable in a fistfight. While the latter can be attributed to his Chronic Hero Syndrome (indeed, "White Rabbit" has Jack getting into a fight with a bully picking on his friend Marc Silverman), the origins of the former skill are left unaddressed by the time the series ends.
The Atoner: After leaving the Island, he becomes consumed with guilt about leaving the other survivors behind and Locke's subsequent death off the island. When his actions lead to Juliet's death, he continues to feel like he must atone for his drastic errors.
Badass Bookworm: Jack might be an intelligent, moralistic doctor but he's also a complete badass who doesn't show much fear and rarely backs down. By Season 6, he's picking up and using assault rifles with no problem.
Battle in the Rain: He has a climatic showdown in the rain three times. Firstly with Ethan, who ably kicks his ass but loses in the subsequent rain-soaked rematch. He then fights the Smoke Monster (in mortal form) on the cliffs during a storm, and very nearly wins until he takes a knife to the gut, a wound which eventually kills him.
Beard of Sorrow: During his post-Island depression, he grows a massive, unruly beard as a sign of just how much of a mental wreck he's become. Notably, as soon as Ben starts guiding him back to the Island and gives him a purpose again, he immediately shaves it off.
Became Their Own Antithesis: Jack started out as the man of science to Locke's man of faith, a division that drove their increasingly intense rivalry. However, after Locke dies and Jack's post-Island life falls apart, he comes to take Locke's ideals as his own; in the last two seasons, it's Jack who is the man of faith, fighting to protect the Island and standing in opposition to the nihilistic Man in Black.
Being Good Sucks: Jack's need to help others and do right has left him with a boat load of issues; he has substance abuse issues, he's convinced his father hates him, his personal life seems isolated, he's unable to salvage his marriage and is subsequently unable to let it go, and he has to deal with the enormous guilt over people he couldn't save. Doing the right thing on the island usually leaves him with enemies.
Betty and Veronica: The Betty to Sawyer's Veronica for Kate's Archie. He ultimately ends up with Kate, while Sawyer is with Juliet.
Big Good: Jack accepts Jacob's offer to become the next guardian of the island, briefly becoming the Big Good before dying and passing the mantle to Hurley.
AB Negative: After trying and failing to find an exact A negative match for Boone, Jack reveals that he's a universal donor and can give Boone some of his blood. Sun eventually forces him to stop the transfusion because it's draining too much from him, and all of it ends up just pooling in Boone's leg and making the situation worse anyway.
Bookends: The first shot of the show is Jack opening his eye as he wakes up on the island. The last is him closing his eye as he dies.
Breaking the Cycle of Bad Parenting: In the flash-sideways, Jack gets to be a better father to his son David than Christian ever was to him, with Jack being a supportive and loving parent to David, the experience allowing him to make peace with the troubled relationship he and Christian had had in life.
Broken Ace: Jack is an intelligent doctor with a vast variety of skills, but psychologically he's much more unstable than he seems at first glance. He suffers through alcoholism after leaving the island, but even before he had a chronic inability to let go of things he has no control over such as his wife deciding she no longer wishes to remain married to him. This can lead to some extremely shady behaviour, such as outright stalking his ex-wife. It also means he can be impossibly stubborn to the point of delusion.
Butt-Monkey: Nothing seems to go right for him. An abusive father, deep psychological issues, a marriage which dissolves, a plane crash and a laundry list of traumatic events that ensue following the crash. Poor Jack just never catches a break.
Catchphrase: "Live together, die alone." He coins it in his first solo flashback episode, "White Rabbit", using it as the crux of a speech to the remaining survivors in which he makes it clear that if they can't get along with each other, they will die without help or rescue.
The Chains of Commanding: Jack is a conflicted leader, and mostly winds up in the position initially because he's the only one who seems capable and willing. He seriously struggles with the pressure of the role and any time he fails to save any of the survivors, and part of his later Character Development is letting go of his Chronic Hero Syndrome and learning when to pass the leadership torch to someone else (in their case, Hurley, who is following Jacob's directions).
Character Death: The Man in Black stabs Jack in the side. He manages to make it through to the Source and fixes the problem. He walks into the bamboo forest he landed in when the plane first crashed and dies with Vincent at his side.
Chekhov's Gun: In the flash-sideways timeline, Jack notices a cut on his neck and a scar on his side, both of which he can’t remember getting (his mother claims the wound on his side was from an appendectomy, which he also doesn’t remember). He had an appendectomy in the original timeline, while both of those wounds were given in his final fight against the Man in Black; the latter wound kills him.
The Chessmaster: He's no Ben Linus, but he does make some very skilled moves. Perhaps because nobody expects it from him, Jack manages to manipulate Ben, Juliet and Tom to save Kate and Sawyer.
Chick Magnet: Over the course of the series, Jack is seen to be involved with, sleep with, or at least be flirted with by no fewer than seven women. Jack himself is a pretty straight-edge, monogamous type and eventually, he winds up with Kate.
Juliet: That's Shephard? He's cute.
Chronic Hero Syndrome: One of his biggest flaws is his saviour complex. In his first flashback, a young Jack tries to stop some bullies from hurting another kid, and gets punched for it. Several people call him out on it and his pathological need to save everybody leads to his more extreme moments. For example, his attempt to amputate Boone's leg in what would have likely been a pointless attempt to save his life. He eventually grows out of this, and while he's still a generally heroic individual, he learns how to accept his failures and move on from them.
Cultured Badass: He plays a mean game of chess and outplays Sawyer in several rounds of poker. He also plays the piano.
Deadpan Snarker: He has his moments, particularly when he's feeling especially confident.
Jack: Tell me something. How come any time there's a hike into the heart of darkness, you sign up?
Determinator: Especially in the earlier seasons, he will stop at nothing in order to save someone's life. This crosses over into obsession, and his determination can end up being outright delusional.
Dr. Jerk: Jack is a pleasant, unassumingly polite man but as a doctor, his bedside manner is awful. He comes across as cold, clinical and uncaring to his patients. Of course, this is the way a doctor needs to be so they can cope with their job, but Jack lacks the charm his father possesses and his understanding of the importance of being comforting and someone patients can trust. He overcompensates by marrying his patient. He becomes a lot better in the flash sideways as his interactions with John before surgery show.
Hurley: What's that thing where doctors make you feel better just by talking to you?
Jack: Bedside manner.
Hurley: Yeah, that. Yours sucks, dude.
Establishing Character Moment: When we first see Jack, he awakes from the crash and instantly starts running about pulling people out of the wreckage, saving at least four people's lives in as many minutes and giving commands to others. It's only once the chaos has died down and everyone else is safe that he walks away from the others to deal with the nasty wound on his side. This establishes him as a man of action who will jump unhesitatingly into the fray for the sake of saving others and isn't afraid to take command of a situation.
Everyone Has Standards: When his father's alcoholism killed a patient, it took a lot of manipulation but Jack was willing to go along with his father's lie to protect his medical license. However, when it turns out the patient was pregnant, Jack changes his statement and tells the truth, knowing that doing so will destroy his father's career.
Face Death with Dignity: With the Man in Black dead, his own work to save the Island complete, and his friends free to live out their lives in peace, Jack simply walks out to the bamboo grove where he'd awoken after Flight 815 crashed and lies down to die, with Vincent emerging from the jungle to make sure he doesn't have to be alone as he passes away.
Fatal Flaw: His inability to let go proves to be this tying in with his compulsive need to save everyone and come down hard on himself if he can't, which often makes him stubborn to the point where he's unreasonable. He eventually moves past this as the series moves along.
Florence Nightingale Effect: His relationship with Sarah Wagner, his ex-wife, was based entirely on this. Deconstructed, since Sarah still idolizes him for saving her and Jack thinks he's obligated to be her caretaker. The foundations of their relationship are too shaky to build a marriage on, and it gradually dissolves.
Genius Bruiser: He's a very skilled spinal surgeon, but he's also a capable albeit untrained fighter who can deliver some truly epic beatdowns when pissed off.
Good Is Not Soft: While he's no doubt a hero, Jack is in no way a pushover. His speech while trying to convince Sawyer to give up a briefcase full of guns is a standout.
Go Out with a Smile: Dying from his wounds, Jack wanders back into the bamboo growth where he first awoke on the island and, after seeing the plane taking off with his friends aboard, dies with a smile.
The Hero Dies: The last shot of the series is Jack closing his eye as he dies from his wounds.
Heroic Sacrifice: In the series finale when he saves the Island despite knowing he'll die in the process. Of course, he was dying from his injury anyway.
I Cannot Self-Terminate: Because he's one of Jacob's candidates, he can't kill himself. The one time he seriously considers it and gets ready to jump off a bridge, a car accident happens just nearby and his heroic instincts kick in. Jack realizes this in season six and uses it to encourage Richard to continue living; he lights a stick of dynamite (ostensibly to kill Richard), but then sits and talks while the fuse runs out, correctly predicting that it will go out at the last possible second. Richard seeing this reignites his belief in Jacob and gives him the will to live.
Inconvenient Hippocratic Oath: Jack, somewhat reasonably, ignores his oath and refuses to help Ben...at first. Eventually, he gives in, but only to use Ben as leverage when he has him helpless on the operating table. He also later refuses to operate on Ben's gunshot in 1977, which is part of the reason he ends up with the Others in the first place.
Ivy League for Everyone: He attended Columbia University.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: When a situation heats up, Jack gets snippy and short-tempered but he does have a genuine desire to help others.
Kate: Being told not to come along. Now you know what it's like to be me.
Jack: Does that mean I should wait 20 minutes and go anyway?
Last Kiss: After he's mortally wounded, Jack and Kate have their final kiss before she leaves for the Ajira plane and he returns to the Heart.
The Leader: To the 815 survivors, which he isn't always happy about.
Long-Lost Relative: Jack and Claire are half-siblings through Christian, which Jack doesn't learn until after he leaves the Island, meeting Claire's mother at Christian's funeral.
Love Makes You Dumb: His love for Kate and despair at having lost her leads him to detonate a hydrogen bomb in the hopes of preventing Flight 815 from having crashed in the first place. It not only doesn't work, but it sets in motion the events that cause the crash twenty-seven years later.
Love Triangle: He's involved in an extremely long Love Triangle with Kate and Sawyer. He eventually becomes the "winner" when Sawyer gets with Juliet.
Manly Tears: He's often seen crying in various moments. "Exodus, Part 1" is particularly memorable with one of the most emotional moments in the series, as Sawyer tells him about his meeting with his father Christian in Australia.
The Medic: His medical expertise makes him invaluable among the survivors.
Miles to Go Before I Sleep: Despite being mortally wounded, Jack keeps going for as long as he can to save the Island, first by making Hurley his successor, then by getting Desmond out of the Heart, and then by sealing it himself. He only finally stops when he returns to where he first landed on the Island and sees his friends escaping on the Ajira plane; once he knows they're safe, he finally shuts his eyes.
Mirror Character: In Season 6, Jack becomes a mirror of his former ideological rival, John Locke, as he is now convinced of his destiny to protect the Island and is the most adamant about staying when the rest of the survivors plan to leave. This shows the most in the afterlife; while Locke in life was the man of faith and Jack was the man of science, in the afterlife, it's Jack who insists that nothing, even a broken spine, is irreversible, while Locke is committed to his belief in the science of his injury.
My Greatest Failure: After Locke's suicide finally makes Jack into a believer, he eventually reveals that his biggest regret is that now it's too late for him to tell John that he was right about everything.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: His attempts to "fix things" usually fail and when they don't they usually make things worse. The most prominent example is his plan to detonate Jughead: he intends to blow it up to prevent Oceanic 815 from crashing, but Jughead’s detonation begins the chain of events that lead to the crash in the first place.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown:
In "Through the Looking Glass", Ben tricks Jack into thinking that he'd just executed Bernard, Jin and Sayid. Jack beats the absolute hell out of Ben, stopping just short of killing him.
In "The Beginning of the End", he tackles Locke to the ground for his murder of Naomi, grabs a gun, and attempts to shoot Locke, only failing to kill him because the gun was unloaded. Even after the gun doesn't work, he starts pummeling Locke relentlessly with his fists and has to be dragged off him by Sayid and Sawyer.
In "The Incident", Jack's fight with Sawyer sees him on the receiving end; once Sawyer gets the upper hand, he pummels Jack with his bare hands until Juliet stops the fight.
Parents as People: In the flash-sideways, he's not the best father to his son David, but he's clearly trying his best. Part of overcoming his issues from his mortal life is by breaking the cycle of abuse from the fathers of his line, which he does by going to David's piano recital and finally telling him everything he wishes his father told him: it doesn't matter what David does, Jack is always going to be proud of him anyway.
Plot Armor: A rare case where Plot Armor is an actual power the character possesses. Jack realizes he's wearing Plot Armor and allows a fuse to run down on a stick of TNT. The light on the fuse extinguishes itself just before it can trigger. He tries to repeat this later, this time with a bomb made by the Man in Black, but Sawyer screws it up by tampering with the bomb and thus subverting the armor.
Rage Against the Reflection: When he realizes that Jacob has been watching him his entire life, he smashes all the Lighthouse mirrors.
Secret-Keeper: Early in season one he works out that Charlie is going through withdrawal by recognising the physical symptoms. After promising to help him get through it, he tells Hurley that Charlie has the flu to explain why he's so sickly.
Self-Appointed Leader: In beginning of the show, Jack assumes the symbolic role of the leader for the Oceanic 815 survivors.
Shoot the Dog: After Sawyer's failed attempt to euthanize Edward Mars condemns the man to a slow, painful demise, Jack, despite his previous unwillingness to do so, ends Mars' suffering himself.
Skeptic No Longer: Season 5 and beyond, when he starts believing and becomes more passive.
Take Up My Sword: After being grievously wounded by the Man in Black, he turns over guardianship of the island to Hurley.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: It's not hard to see why the likes of Sarah, Gabriela, Achara, Ana Lucia, Kate and Juliet gravitate toward him. Even Miles calls him 'handsome' albeit in an aggressive way.
To the Pain: Jack gives a brutal and chilling speech to Sawyer when he won't give up Kate's locked case to him.
"That's the antibiotic I've been giving you for the knife wound in your arm. You're right in the middle of the treatment cycle now, if I keep giving you the pills you're going to be right as rain. But I'm going to stop giving you the pills. And for two days you're going to think you're all good, then it's going to start to itch. The day after that the fever's going to come and you're going to start seeing red lines running up and down your arm. A day or two after that you'll beg me to take the case, just to cut off your arm."
Troll: One would be surprised, but when Jack's in a particularly fine mood, he's totally comfortable messing around with the other characters, especially those like Sawyer who usually give him a hard time.
Jack: Have you ever had sex with a prostitute?
Sawyer: What's that got to do with my headaches?
Jack: Maybe a lot.
Sawyer: ...yes.
Jack: Have you ever contracted an STD? (silence) I'll take that as a yes. When was your last outbreak?
Sawyer: Go to hell, Doc. (storms out of tent)
Kate: I know he deserved it, but...
Jack: He needs glasses.
Underestimating Badassery: Most people aren't expecting a career spinal surgeon with daddy issues to be that cunning or dangerous. Whether it's his fellow castaways, the Others, the Freighter folk or the freaking Smoke Monster, they're all usually taken aback to discover that Jack is a far more formidable threat than they realized.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom:
By choosing to save Sarah instead of Adam Rutherford, Jack accidentally begins the years-long chain of events that ends with both Boone and Shannon being on Flight 815.
Jack continuing to pursue Ethan despite his warnings leads to him almost killing Charlie via hanging.
When his efforts to escape the Island finally conclude in season three and he calls for help, the help he summons ends up being Keamy's mercenaries, who kill several of the Survivors and almost kill everyone on the Island.
Jack's actions in 1977, which he takes in an attempt to save their future selves, only ensure that the Survivors end up in danger in the first place. First, he refuses to operate on a teenage Ben's gunshot wound, forcing Kate and Sawyer to turn him over to the Others, and then he champions Daniel's plan to detonate Jughead and prevent the crash of Oceanic 815, which begins the snowball of events that leads to the crash decades later.
We Just Need to Wait for Rescue: Initially, this is Jack's issue hence why he's set on burning the bodies from the crash. After a few days go by and it sets in that no one is coming, Jack becomes far more willing to dig in to the Island, hence why he moves some of the Survivors to the caves further in-land.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: He has some severe issues with his father, both hating him and craving approval. He's only able to let it go when Sawyer passes on the message that Christian was always proud of him, even after Jack cost him his medical license, and he wished he had the balls to just pick up the phone and say that before he died; this allows them to have a heartfelt reunion in the afterlife.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: In Season 5, he's willing to blow up the Island if there's even a chance it will save Flight 815 in the future.
What the Hell, Hero?: In "The Incident", Sawyer calls him out for returning to the Island and upsetting the life he and Juliet had made together, punctuating his words with a brutal beating. When Jack's plan fails and results in Juliet's death, Sawyer calls him out again, angrily blaming Jack for what had happened.
Sawyer: Who the hell do you think you are?! I HAD A LIFE HERE!
When He Smiles: On the rare occasion he's not torturing himself over some failure and the universe stops dumping on him long enough for him to experience some happiness, Jack's smile is a truly wonderful sight to behold. More than anything else, it's suggested that the way Jack acts when he's happy or relaxed are why Kate falls in love with him.
Window Love: With Kate, when they're both held captive by the Others.