Awesomeness by Analysis: For most of the series, he knows very little English, yet he was able to navigate the dynamics of the castaways' group in a fairly short amount of time.
The Brute: For his father-in-law.
Character Death: Drowns in the submarine with Sun.
Defiant to the End: When Pryce was ready to execute him in "Through the Looking Glass", Jin just glared at him and told Pryce to go to hell.
Determinator: Has his moments, especially when it comes to protecting Sun.
Faking the Dead: When Locke prepared to leave the Island to bring the Oceanic Six back, Jin insisted that Locke not bring back Sun or their baby daughter, giving Locke his wedding ring and demanding that Locke tell Sun that he was dead. The ruse ultimately never comes into effect (Locke never managed to speak with Sun before Ben killed him, and Sun returned to the Island anyway).
Fatal Flaw: His lack of trust in others, which drove the wedge between him and Sun in the first place. He does eventually move past this though.
Fire-Forged Friends: Despite starting out at each other's throats, by the end of Season 1, Jin and Michael have become good friends. Come Season 4, Jin is the only survivor who meets Michael again who is genuinely happy to see him, even telling him about Sun's pregnancy.
Freak Out: Has an epic one in a webisode in which he loses a game of golf to Michael and Hurley. Jin loses it, going on a furious tirade about all the humiliations he's suffered before breaking down and crying over how alone he feels.
Heroic Sacrifice: Stays on the submarine to die with his trapped wife rather than escape with the others.
Honor Before Reason: In "House of the Rising Sun", when he beats up Michael upon discovering him with Mr. Paik's watch.
Irony: Jin gave Locke his wedding ring to prove to Sun that he was dead, but Ben (who killed Locke and took the ring off his corpse) used it to prove to Sun that he was still alive.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: To the point that he is willing to let Sun believe that he's dead rather than have her return to the Island.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: The "Heart of Gold" part is slow in coming. Early on, Jin was the oppressive, angry husband of Sun and fans were not supposed to like him. The writers were setting up for a love triangle between Jin, Sun, and Michael. However, they changed their minds and decided to have Jin become a better husband, and Jin and Sun became the most faithful and longlasting pair on the Island.
Kick the Dog: When he destroys Sun's garden. He makes up for it toward the end of the episode by helping her replant it.
Language Barrier: Naturally encountered this problem since he initially knew very little English. By Season 5, he has become fluent. (His actor Daniel Dae Kim who emigrated to the United States at the age of two actually knew very little Korean at the time.)
Love at First Sight: "...And Found" certainly leaves the viewer with the impression that this is the case, what with him and Sun bumping into each other, doing a double take, and smiling.
Made of Iron: Impressively, Jin managed to survive the destruction of the Freighter and spending at least two days adrift at sea without food or water.
Mama's Baby, Papa's Maybe:
Jin's mother was a prostitute who dropped him off at his father's doorstep, claiming that he was his. Jin's father never knew for sure whether Jin was biologically his or not, but he raised Jin as his own all the same.
Given Sun's extramarital affair shortly before she and Jin boarded Flight 815, there is initially a question of whether Sun's pregnancy is from the affair or from intimacy between her and Jin on the Island; Juliet later confirms that Sun's baby was conceived on the Island, and Jin is definitely Ji-Yeon's father.
Missing Mom: And he himself becomes a Disappeared Dad, but not by his own choice.
Mr. Fanservice: Downplayed; Jin is a very handsome and fit man, but, outside of a post-coital Shirtless Scene (albeit one which shows off an impressively toned upper body), his looks don't get a great deal of attention.
Necessarily Evil: Viciously beats men to a pulp for cheating or insulting his father-in-law. Usually to prevent Mr. Paik from having them killed.
Never Found the Body: After the explosion of the ship, and his subsequent return.
Nice Guy: He eventually loses his jerk part completely and becomes a great husband and friend to the rest of survivors.
Odd Friendship: With Michael, considering their first meeting was Jin straight up trying to murder him over a watch. By the end of season one, the two are genuine friends; in season four, Jin is the only one who's happy to see him again despite his betrayal, and Michael sacrifices his life in part to ensure Jin gets back to his wife, with Jin being the last (living) person he sees.
Running Gag: Over the course of the series, Jin survives being in close proximity to an explosion on three different occasions. He dies soon afterward in the last case, but the bomb still failed to kill him.
Son of a Whore: His mother was a prostitute who dumped him on his father. His father isn't even sure if Jin is really his, but he raised him as his own, nonetheless.
Together in Death: With Sun.
Took a Level in Cheerfulness: After some Character Development, Jin becomes much more lively and enthusiastic while having fun with the other survivors.
Took a Level in Kindness: After certain events in Season 1, Jin loosens up and becomes less possessive of Sun (although such traits do surface every now and then), becoming a much more affectionate husband and being much more social with the other survivors.
Turn the Other Cheek: He forgives the fact that Sun cheated on him pretty much instantly, recognizing that it was during a period where he wasn't a good husband and that they've been through so much since then that there's no point dwelling on it.