Aerosol Flamethrower: Against a polar bear.
Agent Mulder: To Jack's Scully. Particularly when he believes he has to push a button every 108 minutes to save the world.
Ambiguous Situation: In "Through the Looking Glass", Locke aims a gun at Jack to try and stop him from contacting the Freighter; while the gun is later revealed to be empty, it's never made clear if Locke already knew this and was bluffing, or if he just couldn't bring himself to try and shoot Jack.
Anti-Hero: To the point where he comes over as an outright villain to his fellow castaways at certain points. Destroying the submarine and killing Naomi were major times when his actions stunned them.
Back from the Dead: Subverted. We thought he'd been resurrected, but really it was just the Man in Black impersonating him.
Bait-and-Switch: In the first few episodes, Locke is teased as some sort of serial killer. He's quietly enigmatic and revealed to have a suitcase full of knives. The slash across his eye makes him look dangerous, and one episode ends with him appearing to glare menacingly at Walt. Upon his first flashback episode, we get a better view of his character, and some of his unusual behavior is explained.
Bald Head of Toughness: He's bald and the most capable of surviving on the Island after the first crash.
Bald Mystic: He's a mysterious, enigmatic character with a shiny dome that leads Sawyer to compare him to Mr Clean.
Because Destiny Says So: Locke's default motivation when following the island's 'commands'.
Big Damn Heroes: During the time-traveling arc early in Season 5, Locke comes out of nowhere to save Sawyer and Juliet from being maimed by the 1950s version of the Others.
Blade Enthusiast: Locke boarded the plane for a survivalist adventure in spite of his handicap and brought a bag filled to bursting with various knives. When Locke shows off his collection, the other survivors are creeped out, which goes along with the way the first few episodes tease Locke as some sort of psycho-killer. He later proves adept at hunting and butchering wild boar with only his knives.
Broken Ace: Locke is brilliant and dangerous, being a competent tracker, combatant, and leader who repeatedly causes massive damage to his opposition. He's also a psychological mess who's so desperate to be special that he'll latch on to any purpose in life he thinks he's found, and his inability to find his purpose ends up putting him in an early grave.
Butt-Monkey: John's life. The man has survived an airplane crash and the Hatch imploding, been beaten and shot, and let's not forget how he was shoved out an 8th story window. He also was hit by a car in the flash sideways.
Character Death: Locke is about to commit suicide in his motel room, but is interrupted by Ben who talks him out of it. However, as soon as Ben gets the information he wanted out of John, he strangles him out of jealousy and stages it to look like the original suicide.
Chekhov's Skill: Locke's knife-throwing ability is noted a few times early in season one, with his hunting declaration and teaching Walt the skill. It doesn't really come up again until a few seasons later, when Locke uses this talent to kill two people.
Cool Old Guy: Zigzagged. On one hand, he’s a fairly old man who hunts boar for fun, was planning on going on an outback walkabout before the crash, and is not to be underestimated in a fight. On the other, he was paralyzed before the crash, tends to receive debilitating injuries to his legs, and manages to hinder the other survivors as much as he helps them.
Cradle-to-Grave Character: Locke's birth is depicted in Season 4's "Cabin Fever", and his death is shown in Season 5's "The Life and Death of Jeremy Bentham".
Dead All Along: John Locke dies in the events of seasons 4-5 and is revived midway through the fifth season. Then it turns out that Locke actually was never brought back and is still dead; the person that's appeared to be Locke walking around for the remainder of the series has actually been The Man in Black assuming his form.
Deadpan Snarker: Not as overt as other members of the cast, but certainly present.
Walt: [My mother and I] move a lot. She got sick. She died a couple of weeks ago.
Locke: You're having a bad month.
Death by Irony: Locke is murdered by Ben, the very man who talked him out of suicide. Adding insult to injury, Ben then stages Locke's body to make his death look like it really was a suicide.
Death Equals Redemption: His staged suicide at Ben's hand renders any conflict Jack had with him moot; if anything, Locke's death outright breaks Jack, especially because he thinks he might have pushed him to it. From then on, it's made clear that as much as Locke went about his goals in the wrong way, the goals were heroic, with Locke's memory being a driving force for the remaining survivors in their conflict against the Man in Black.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Of the Butt-Monkey and Messianic Archetype tropes. John has been through a lot throughout his life, and it never seems that life can cut Locke a break. As a result, he's left as a very insecure and emotionally wrecked man who's constantly trying to convince other people of his beliefs. He fails, and eventually he is killed by Ben out of jealousy. He also is shown to be genuinely special and is aware of the island's mystical properties. But his tendency to be opaque ultimately dooms him from convincing people of his beliefs, and he ultimately fails...until his death.
Despair Event Horizon: After he fails to convince a single one of the Oceanic Six to return to the Island.
Destination Defenestration: How he was crippled.
Determinator: When Locke feels he has a purpose he is unquestionably this, as seen when opening the hatch or pressing the button (and then not pressing the button). Even from birth, Locke was a fighter; he was born three months early, but managed to fight off a number of infections that should've killed him to the point that he was outright called a "miracle".
Doomed Moral Victor: In the end, all of John's goals come to fruition; the Oceanic Six return to the Island, Jack finally becomes a believer, and thanks to his efforts, the Island is saved from its biggest threat and will be protected by Hurley for centuries to come. Sadly, it only comes around because Ben kills him out of spite and uses his death as a tool to motivate the others, and it's only in the afterlife that he gets a reward for all of his suffering and strife.
Driven to Suicide:
After spending two days lying in a mass grave badly wounded, Locke is ready to end his suffering with a nearby pistol. A vision of Walt convinces John not to take his own life and to find the strength to get out of the pit.
After failing to convince any of the Oceanic 6 to return to the Island with him, a despairing Locke decides to kill himself. Ben "helps", talking Locke out of hanging himself long enough to get information out of him, only to then finish the job and make it look like a suicide.
Earn Your Happy Ending: After all the shit he goes through, both on the island and in his life before, John ends the series vindicated with the Island saved, Jack now a believer and finally getting confirmation that he really was special and he is then able to move on with the rest of the survivors.
Establishing Character Moment: Locke gets two in the pilot. In the opening scene, before he receives any introduction, he's one of the random passengers who help Jack save a man's life from the plane's wreckage. Later, while everyone rushes to find shelter during a sudden rainstorm, Locke doesn't move, instead smiling and embracing the rain with open arms.
Everyone Has Standards:
Locke doesn't always agree with Michael's parenting style and tries to encourage Walt's love of things like knife-throwing, even if it means originally going behind his back. However, when Michael demands that Locke stay away from him by pulling rank as his father, Locke does respect his wishes and tells Walt to go away when he tries to talk to him later.
Despite having every reason to despise his father and wish him dead, Locke can't bring himself to actually end Anthony Cooper's life. That said, when Richard gives him a workaround (revealing that someone else, namely Sawyer, also has good reason to kill Cooper), Locke takes it and shows little regret for his father's death.
Despite his belief that the Oceanic 6 must return to the Island, Locke honors Jin's request to not bring Sun back and never tries to approach her. He also decides against bringing Walt back, feeling that the boy had been through enough (as well as tactfully omitting his awareness of Michael's death to avoid further traumatizing Walt).
Exact Words: When he meets Walt again in season five and Walt asks about Michael's whereabouts, Locke tells him that the last he heard, Michael was on a freighter near the Island. It's technically correct, but Locke knows that the freighter was blown up and that Michael was on it, so it's clearly his way of not having to break the news to him.
Fatal Flaw:
His desperate desire for acceptance, the need to believe that he's been chosen for a special destiny, and his inability to trust himself unless he's sure that a higher power is guiding him. It's made clear repeatedly that Locke is special and he's right that the Island chose him for something, but his lack of patience leads him to take the first answer and then not look farther, and when that backfires, he immediately loses all faith until he can find something else to latch onto.
His tendency of being opaque to his fellow survivors about why he believes the island is special tends to bite him and earns distrust from the other survivors. If he had been honest and forthright from the start, he might have had an easier time convincing the survivors that something more was going on.
Freudian Excuse: A rare heroic example. Locke is someone who's been abandoned, isolated and tread on his entire life, and it's led to a desperate desire for a higher "special" purpose that he's never been able to find. Once he finds that purpose on the Island, he'll do anything, even kill, to keep it.
Friendly Enemy: Locke and Jack's rivalry escalates to the point that Jack outright tries to shoot him at one point, but on Locke's end, it's never personal and he always respects his capabilities as a leader even if he disagrees with his end goal. It's to the point that when Locke awakens in the afterlife thanks to Jack's surgery, he immediately breaks out into a wide tearful smile, even though their last meeting had Jack object to everything Locke stood for.
The Friend Nobody Likes:
Not at first. He starts off as perhaps the most useful survivor due to his skills at tracking and hunting, not to mention his ability to help others see into themselves. As the series progresses, however, and his violent, impulsive, and reckless side becomes more pronounced, it begins to cause frequent tensions with his fellow survivors. Namely, he has had conflicts with Shannon, Charlie, Eko, Sayid, Kate, Sawyer, and especially Jack. After Locke warns the rest of the group about the freighter and tries to convince them to come with him to the Barracks, Rose firmly tells Bernard, "I'm not going anywhere with that man," despite Rose herself being among the few survivors who never wanted to be rescued. After the Oceanic Six leave the Island, Locke is unsuccessful in convincing any of them to come back, and Jack and Kate in particular are openly hostile to Locke upon seeing him again.
This ultimately becomes subverted after his death. His apparent suicide rocks many of the remaining Survivors, and one of Jack's primary goals upon returning to the Island is honoring Locke's memory. In particular, when the Man in Black tries to act like he truly is Locke, Jack comes to Locke's defense and indicates that he now considers Locke to have been a good, if misguided, man.
Friend to All Children: While he never had any of his own, Locke is quite good with kids, once working in the toy section of a department store (where he's shown encouraging a young boy's interest in Mouse Trap), quickly forming a bond with Walt, and acting as a surrogate uncle to Aaron.
From Nobody to Nightmare: A rather sad and lonely old man in a wheelchair who worked for a box company. On the Island, John regains the ability to walk and becomes a hunter, adventurer, leader and Messianic Archetype who is not to be underestimated.
Great White Hunter: His role in the beginning of the series. Charlie even calls him this outright at one point.
Handicapped Badass: Locke was in a wheelchair but was still prepared to go on an outback walkabout. Deconstructed, as Locke's attempts to be a badass despite his condition, although admirable, don't get him anywhere; he's denied the chance to go on the walkabout because of his condition, and anytime his legs get injured on the Island, he's left just as helpless as he was before despite his best efforts.
Hidden Depths: He's one of the oldest survivors of the crash and fancies himself a mystical guru, yet he's also the only one to actually recognize Charlie as the bassist for Drive Shaft, even noting that he believes their first album was a better effort than their second. He humorously notes that just because he's old doesn't mean he has bad taste.
Hollywood Healing: Subverted. For a while we don't know that John was paralyzed, or that Rose had cancer. When it's revealed it was fixed upon coming to the Island, it becomes more and more apparent that it's the magical properties of the Island that fixed him.
Horrible Judge of Character: Zig-zagged. Early on, he seems to understand his fellow survivors on a deep and intuitive level and helps them overcome a lot of their personal issues before his own messiah complex hits a reef, triggering a string of absolutely horrible decisions. Although in fairness, his life had been littered with bad decision after bad decision even before he arrived on the island. The one thing he excelled at above all else was being brutally manipulated by those around him.
I Just Want to Be Special: It's why he's desperate to believe Ben so often, or really anyone who will tell him he has a higher purpose. In the finale, just before Locke moves on with his friends, Ben admits that Locke always was special, shamefully admitting to killing him because Ben knew that he wasn't.
Improbable Weapon User: He uses an Aerosol Flamethrower to fight off a polar bear and his own crutches to stop "Henry" from strangling Ana Lucia.
Intergenerational Friendship: Locke's first and longest-lasting friendship on the Island is with Walt, the pre-pubescent child on the Island. He not only encourages Walt's attempts at independent hobbies and Island life, but he does his best to do so without compromising Michael's role as his father in the process. When Locke ends up on the mainland in 2007, Locke tracks Walt down even without intending to return him to the Island, and they're both excited to see each other after all the time apart.
Irony:
Locke ends up being Jack's main rival as leader of the survivors' camp, which is ironic considering that Locke was the one who originally encouraged Jack to accept his role as de facto leader.
John is murdered immediately after being talked out of committing suicide. For extra irony, his killer was the same man who talked him out of hanging himself. His killer then proceeds to use John’s death to manipulate the Oceanic Six to return to the Island, which was John’s goal in the first place.
When the survivors learn that the Freighter isn’t there to save them, Locke leads the people who would rather stay on the Island than risk encountering the new people and takes them to the Barracks. The mercenaries then attack the Barracks and not the beach, where Jack’s group is, and almost all of Locke’s group dies.
After he's dead, the identity and legacy he'd built for himself over the course of the series end up being hijacked by an evil bastard who desperately wants to escape to the outside world, destroy the Island (which he hates) and kill all of the survivors. Basically, appearing exactly like Locke while being his complete opposite.
It's All My Fault: He accepts blame entirely for the destruction of the hatch.
Karmic Death: In a depressing turn, Locke is murdered in almost the exact same way as his father, whose death he orchestrated.
Knight Templar: At the height of his fanatical faith, he's murdered people for the island.
The Lancer: Locke is Jack's ideological rival as the man of faith to Jack's man of science, but also frequently serves as Jack's Number Two when making important decisions about the fate of the group. When Jack is captured by the Others at the end of Season 2, Locke is the leader that the survivors turn to, and he is the one who leads their rescue mission. When the freighter team arrive on the Island in Season 4, causing a rift between the survivors who believe that the freighter has come to rescue them and those that believe they need to prepare to fight them, Locke leads the latter faction in opposition to Jack leading the former. Though they butt heads throughout the series, it's clear that Locke has enormous respect for Jack as a leader and is frustrated that Jack rarely heeds his advice or returns that respect.
Last-Name Basis: Many characters know him as 'Locke'. Only Ben consistently calls him John. This changes somewhat after his death; with the Man in Black assuming John's appearance, the other characters refer to the dark entity as "Locke" for lack of anything else to call him, but whenever someone refers to the Man in Black as "John", there's always a reply of "this/that is not John".
Like Father, Like Son: Subverted. Locke really wants to be like his dad at first, this being the start of his interest in hunting. But this quickly changes when his father shows his true colors. While Locke does prove that he is capable of being as deceptive and subtly manipulative as his father, he is ultimately not an evil or malicious person like Anthony Cooper.
Meaningful Name: He is named after a British philosopher who is one of the founding fathers of natural law theory, among other things. Locke also postulated that the mind was a blank slate and that knowledge is determined by experience determined from sense perception. Given what happens to the character during the course of the show, this is all very fitting. The alias Widmore gives Locke in season four, Jeremy Bentham (also the name of a British philosopher), is something of a Historical In-Joke because Bentham's utilitarianism is quite at odds with Locke's natural law theory. Widmore lampshades this by saying that “if [Locke’s] parents can have a sense of humor, why can’t I?”
The Mentor: Especially in the first season, and especially to Boone. He spends several episodes helping the other survivors deal with their personal issues. He also served this to Jack, although Jack wouldn't realize it until after Locke's death.
Messianic Archetype: A subversion. Locke initially seems to definitely fit this role. A whole race of people awaiting his arrival? Suffering a lot and eventually dying to save everyone? Having a resurrection? Cruelly subverted in season five when it is revealed Locke was never brought back to life at all.
Mirror Character: In Season 6, Jack becomes a mirror of his former ideological rival, John Locke, as he is now convinced of his destiny to protect the Island and is the most adamant about staying when the rest of the remaining survivors plan to leave.
My God, What Have I Done?: He is devastated when Boone dies as a result of his influence, blaming himself and thinking the Island has betrayed his faith. Of course, when he appears to receive a sign that he's on the right path, Locke recovers and claims Boone was "a sacrifice the Island demanded." He later goes back to how he originally felt; while he and Desmond are waiting for the Swan countdown to reach zero, he tells Desmond about what happened and his somber tone indicates he is genuinely remorseful about it, and when a vision of Boone repeats the phrase back to him, he looks deeply ashamed for having ever said that.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: There are a couple of times when Locke feels provoked to very suddenly and surprisingly beat someone senseless. The first time is when Charlie's erratic behavior ends up endangering Claire and Aaron. The second is when Mikhail stands in the way of him meeting Jacob.
Nom de Mom: Locke is his mother's surname.
Organ Dodge: After years of anger and regret, Locke's missing kidney ends up saving his life when he is shot by Ben. The bullet passes right through his abdomen, and he even says to Sawyer that he would be dead if he still had a kidney there.
Papa Wolf: He is rather protective of Claire and her baby, as well as Walt.
Parental Abandonment: Locke's father wanted nothing to do with him until he needed a kidney, and his mother, who was a teenager when John was born, panicked after his birth and abandoned her son. Adding insult to injury, Locke's maternal grandmother coldly asked about putting him up for adoption immediately after John's mother had second thoughts about raising him.
Parental Substitute: Serves as father figure to many of the younger passengers including Charlie, Claire, Walt and especially Boone.
Patricide: Indirectly; although unwilling to kill Anthony Cooper himself, Locke, with Richard's help, figures out that he can lead Sawyer into doing it for him. Sawyer does kill Cooper, but Locke still bears some responsibility for his father's death.
Perma-Shave: He usually sports stubble on the island, but never a full beard.
Pet the Dog: He goes out of his way to endear himself to the other survivors in the first season. This includes finding Vincent for Walt and letting Michael take credit for it, helping Charlie overcome his heroin addiction, compelling Boone to overcome his fixation with Shannon, building Claire a baby cradle for her birthday, and encouraging Jack to seek out his "white rabbit" and embrace his role as a leader. Unfortunately, almost none of these relationships turn out well due to Locke's later actions.
Posthumous Character: Even when it turns out that Locke wasn't resurrected by returning to the Island (and that it was truly the Man in Black taking his form), Jack is particularly motivated by honoring Locke's memory and desire to protect the Island that he loved so dearly. Jack's antipathy with the MIB is in part because he dishonors Locke by taking his form and trying to act like he's anything like Locke.
Prefers Proper Names: After learning their real names, Locke prefers to address both Sawyer and Hurley by their actual first names (James and Hugo), rather than their more commonly used nicknames. He also often refers to Ben by 'Benjamin' until their final conversation in the afterlife.
Premature Birth Drama: He was born three months early after his mother was hit by a car and sent into early labour. In an early sign of his Determinator nature, he fought off multiple infections that would have killed him causing the nurses to declare him a "miracle".
Properly Paranoid: Locke turned out to be right not to trust the Freighter's arrival, although his warnings didn't manage to save many people.
Secret Test of Character: He has a habit of coming up with these for his fellow castaways early on, usually as a way of testing their faith and resolve.
Self-Made Orphan: Kills his father with help from Sawyer, though his mother may have still been alive at the time.
Tragic Hero: He's very gifted, but throughout his life he's unwilling to accept the actual gifts or the blessings in his life, instead being focused on what he wants or how he's been wronged. This starts with him denying his genius in favor of sports and violence. He also could have been the Chosen One if he'd been more patient.
Turn the Other Cheek: Locke is an incredibly forgiving man who holds no grudges towards anyone who does him wrong, even to the point where he completely shrugs off Ben shooting him point blank and leaving him for dead. His inability to hold any grudges is to his own detriment at times, as it leads to Anthony Cooper and Ben being able to repeatedly manipulate and take advantage of him, though it's played heartwarmingly when he forgives Ben for murdering him in the afterlife.
Undignified Death: John dies scared and confused (according to the Man in Black, his last thought was "I don't understand") when the very man who talked him out of suicide suddenly strangled him to death with the very noose John intended to use to hang himself, then staged the death as a suicide anyway.
Unwitting Pawn: To Ben and the Man in Black.
Waistcoat of Style: He wears a hunting vest when they venture into the jungle for much of Season 1.
Warrior Therapist: He's perhaps at his happiest and most useful during Season 1, partly due to this trope. He helps the survivors cope with their issues (Charlie and Boone of note) and hunts down boars.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: A complicated issue. Locke has an obsessive need to gain fulfillment through his long-lost father, even after Cooper reveals exactly how despicable he is and how little he cares for John. Perhaps especially after this.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: Locke isn't a hateful man and does want to protect the island... but he does so at the expense of his fellow survivors, bringing him into conflict with them multiple times. Locke often has an especially antagonistic relationship with Jack because of this.
Yank the Dog's Chain: Locke regaining the use of his legs is, obviously, a big deal for his character. Naturally, most of the major injuries he sustains are to his legs, and he loses the ability to walk once or twice when he seriously loses faith in his destiny.
You Have Outlived Your Usefulness: Ben talks him down from suicide to get the information he needs from him and then murders him instantly afterwards.
Zen Survivor: At first, when he's an extremely calm, quiet and contemplative presence among the survivors. At events progress, Locke gradually becomes more short-tempered and impulsive.