Anti-Hero/Anti-Villain: Sayid is constantly straddling the line between hero and villain. He's ruthless but well-intentioned, and while he hates the part of himself that's good at inflicting pain, he can't fully put it behind him.
The Atoner: On and off, with a final stint toward the end.
Ax-Crazy: When he comes back to life after drowning in season 6.
Back from the Dead: In season 6, he dies after being shot by Roger Linus and subsequently drowned in the healing water of the temple by the Others. However, he awakens after being dead for a few hours, much to everyone's shock.
Badass Bookworm: Sayid is very well-read and cultured.
Came Back Wrong: When he returns from the dead, Dogen declares that he's 'infected'. He switches to the Man in Black's side and becomes an emotionless shell. With help from Desmond, however, Sayid manages to come back to himself and ultimately dies a hero.
Cartwright Curse: Nadia, Shannon, Elsa, and Ilana.
Character Death: On the submarine, Sayid takes the bomb that the Man in Black planted and runs deeper into the sub to minimize the instant damage of the explosion. In doing so, he saved the lives of Jack, Hurley, Frank, Kate and Sawyer.
Co-Dragons: With Claire, to the Man in Black in Season 6.
Create Your Own Villain: By shooting a 12-year-old Ben, he instead sets off the events that turn Ben into the person he wanted to kill.
Dark Is Not Evil: Sayid usually wears dark or black clothing, and, despite his own harsher qualities and Heel–Face Revolving Door, he goes out as a hero.
Deal with the Devil: Sayid has an unfortunate tendency to make these, be it with Ben or The Man in Black.
Disproportionate Retribution: In season 2, he beats up Ben when he asks what happens to Sayid's loved one and says that he doesn't know how deep he "buried his wife". While Ben's story wasn't true in any way, beating someone up just because that person can't answer a question that no one can really answer is extreme.
The Dragon: To Ben, for a while after they leave the Island, and then to the Man in Black on the Island.
Dying as Yourself: Sayid heroically sacrifices himself after betraying the Man in Black.
Establishing Character Moment: Sayid immediately begins getting a signal fire going once the crash has settled, including roping in Charlie for help. This not only shows his desperation to get off the Island, but also his leadership material.
Evil Stole My Faith: Implied; while Sayid is shown to be a fairly attentive Muslim before the crash (he takes his faith seriously enough to insist on seeing Essam buried rather than cremated) and is shown praying on a few occasions on the Island, after his rescue and Nadia's death, he shows no sign of keeping up with his religion, notably drinking alcohol, which is forbidden in Islam, the implication being that the loss of his wife and the weight of serving as Ben's hitman put an end to any religious devotion on Sayid's part.
Face–Heel Turn: He goes rogue midway through Season 5, assaulting Jin and shooting a 12-year-old Ben in cold blood, which blows the cover of the other survivors. He briefly allies with Jack again during the plan to set off the bomb, before defecting to the Man in Black in Season 6.
Fatal Flaw: His self-loathing, and his belief that he will be unable to move on from his violent past or become a better person.
Genius Bruiser: His military training makes him a tough opponent that few can stand to (only Keamy has really bested him in a straight-up fight) and he's highly knowledgable on a variety of subjects.
Heartbroken Badass: After the deaths of Shannon, Nadia and to a lesser degree Elsa.
Heel–Face Revolving Door: After Nadia's death, Sayid can't decide whose side he's on. He switches from Ben's side to that of the survivors, then to himself, to the survivors again, then to the Man in Black, and finally the survivors.
Heroic BSoD: After Shannon's death, and again later after Nadia's death.
Heroic Sacrifice: Sayid is fully prepared to give his life for his friends and does so when the Man in Black stows a bomb away on the submarine.
I Am a Monster: Under the influence of truth serum in Season 5, Sayid sadly admits that he is "a bad man".
Ironic Name: The word "Sayid" (سعيد) literally means "happy" in Arabic. Between his guilt over his history with the Republican Guard, his deep self-loathing, and his constantly being wracked with guilt over both his past and current mistakes, it's safe to say Sayid has had very little reason to be happy about his lot in life.
Jack Bauer Interrogation Technique: He was a torturer and tends to resort to these methods.
The Lancer: Though he's arguably a Co-Lancer to Jack with Locke and Sawyer throughout the show, Sayid becomes a sole Lancer during Season 4 when Locke and Sawyer have split from the main survivors, having the technological knowledge to support Jack's natural leadership skills.
Laser-Guided Karma: After shooting the twelve-year-old Ben, Sayid is himself shot by Ben's father, Roger.
Love Makes You Evil: The Man in Black manages to snag him as The Dragon by promising him he could bring Nadia (or possibly Shannon) back from the dead.
Loving a Shadow: It's implied that his love for Nadia is mainly based on his guilt for torturing her and need for forgiveness. In the finale, Shannon, not Nadia, is confirmed to be his true soulmate in the flash-sideways.
Majorly Awesome: Flashbacks show him as a Major in the Iraqi Army.
Mr. Fanservice: He sure likes his tank-tops.
Not So Stoic: Sayid has an almost unflappable demeanour, but by virtue of the sheer amount of horrible situations thrown at him, he does break down at times.
The Professor: Sayid is the most technologically adept of the survivors. This allows him to construct radio transmitters and other gizmos from salvaged parts.
Properly Paranoid: When telling Hurley about Locke's death, Sayid says "they said it was suicide"; Locke was, indeed, murdered, though it's unclear if Sayid ever realized that it was Ben who was responsible.
Psychotic Smirk: Post-infection Sayid flashes one that terrifies even BENJAMIN LINUS.
Redemption Equals Death: Due to his Heroic Sacrifice.
Roaring Rampage of Revenge: Following Nadia's death, Sayid murders members of Widmore's inner circle on Ben's instruction.
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: When Sayid time travels to the 1970s, Sayid takes initiative and shoots a young Ben Linus, trying to kill him before he becomes a problem later. When DHARMA won’t heal him, though, Kate is forced to hand him over to the Others to save his life, beginning Ben’s path to becoming the man Sayid wanted to kill in the first place.
The Smart Guy: Of the survivors. Sayid is highly intelligent and has a vast knowledge of technology and survival techniques.
Then Let Me Be Evil: Late in Season Five, Sayid seems to more or less give up on any hope of redemption, shooting a twelve-year old Ben in the chest. His infection in Season Six only makes it worse, with Sayid being almost completely apathetic as he sees Claire try to cut Kate's throat. In the end, though, a talk with Desmond manages to reawaken Sayid's better nature, and he dies as a hero.
Torture Technician: A huge part of his character is his past as an interrogator for the Republican Guard.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: His shooting young Ben not only creates the enemy he was trying to kill, but ends up blowing the cover of his friends in DHARMA, which sets off the chain of events leading to the plan to erase the timeline by detonating Jughead, which ends up causing the Incident and gets Juliet killed.
Would Hurt a Child: After travelling back to the 1970's, Sayid shoots a twelve-year-old Ben, hoping to avert the damage that Ben would cause as an adult. Ironically, this only results in Ben growing up to become the very man that Sayid was hoping to prevent from existing.