Abandoned Catchphrase: In the earlier seasons, he would occasionally exclaim "Good morning, Krusty Krew!" upon entering the Krusty Krab, though this hasn't been said by him since the pre-movie era.
Abusive Parents: Patrick mentions in the episode "Home Sweet Pineapple" that he was permanently kicked out of his parents' house at a young age. However, he reunites with his real parents at the end of "I'm with Stupid", implying that he has no hard feelings towards them despite what they did.
Accidental Truth: In the episode "Patrick-Man!", he starts attacking patrons at the Krusty Krab, believing that one of them is a supervillain in disguise. When Mr. Krabs is about to throw him out, it turns out that the Dirty Bubble was in fact there in disguise.
Acquired Situational Narcissism: All the freakin' time. He becomes one of these any time he gets a taste of power or some sort of reassurance of his "genius" abilities (the episode where he gets a boat, when he becomes king, the time when his parents come over, etc).
Acrofatic: He's pretty quick and nimble for a fat guy, though it depends on the writer. In one of his best moments, he was able to run faster than a train without brakes.
Adipose Rex: In "Rule of Dumb", he temporarily becomes a king.
All Take and No Give: As shown in "Yours, Mine and Mine", in Patrick's eyes, sharing amounts to SpongeBob paying for such things as food and toys and Patrick getting them all to himself.
Animal Motifs: Gorillas. He tends to behave like one in many of his tamper tantrums, such as in "Valentine's Day", down to beating his chest and being treated as if he's a wild animal on the loose. In "I Had an Accident", he wears a gorilla suit and pretends to attack Sandy as part of a plan to get SpongeBob to leave his house. Additionally, Patrick's prehistoric ancestors both behave and look rather simian-like.
Animals Hate Him: Not as much as Squidward, but there are some examples.
In "Rock-a-Bye Bivalve", Junior starts nibbling Patrick's head when he gets a closer look at him. Junior of course grows to love Patrick as his adoptive dad, but drops a coconut on his head before giving him a goodbye kiss.
In "Big Pink Loser", he gets stung by a swarm of jellyfish after telling them he won an award.
In "Whelk Attack", he enrages a ferocious whelk by Blowing a Raspberry at it.
In "Squidbird", he gets attacked by a flock of scallops for dressing up as Squidward (while training them to be friendlier around Squidward).
Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: Tends to get easily distracted. A great example being in 'Wet Painters", when he proposes replacing the dollar on Mr. Krabs' wall, only to end up spending his dollar on candy from a vending machine.
Attractive Bent-Gender: When he's disguised as Patricia in "That's No Lady", every male in Bikini Bottom is attracted to him, especially Mr. Krabs and Squidward.
Authority in Name Only: In "Rule of Dumb", after SpongeBob tells him that as king, he can have anything he wants, Patrick starts taking things from people he walks up to on the streets, to the point where he's amassed a massive amount of tribute from his "subjects." When he orders Squidward's house to be demolished to make way for a Ferris wheel, Squidward manages to sway the rest of Bikini Bottom to realize that Patrick has no real power over them, and the construction crew, and people who were about to give Patrick more stuff, walk home and wonder why they gave him anything in the first place.
Autocannibalism: There are some occasions where he eats his own hand along with whatever food he was holding in it. Good thing for him his hand always regenerates afterwards.
Ax-Crazy: He's prone to random fits of violence and insanity whenever something upsets him, and sometimes not even that's necessary.
In "Valentine's Day", he goes on a rampage at a Valentine's Day-themed carnival out of jealousy regarding all the gifts SpongeBob gave people when all he got was a handshake, and even threatens to kill SpongeBob when he still hasn't gotten his gift.
In "Nature Pants", he chases SpongeBob around Jellyfish Fields while attempting to catch him with a jellyfishing net.
In "Rule of Dumb", he becomes progressively Drunk with Power upon being appointed king, eventually threatening to imprison all of Bikini Bottom just because Squidward called him the king of morons.
He's perfectly willing to give Gary a "bath" with a flamethrower in "Pet Sitter Pat", among other forms of abuse he heaps upon the poor snail.
Babysitter from Hell: He plays this role to Gary in "Pet Sitter Pat" while looking after him by acting needlessly negligent and even physically abusive to him (bathing someone with a flamethrower is a new low even for someone like Patrick). More like "Pet Sitter from Hell", though.
Barefoot Cartoon Animal: Even if he wears a shirt for a special occasion, he usually never wears shoes. He does own a pair of shoes in "Your Shoe's Untied" but does not actually wear them in his feet and ends up wearing it on his hands.
Believing Their Own Lies: In "I'm With Stupid", he makes a plan with SpongeBob to have SpongeBob pretend to be stupid for Patrick's parents so Patrick would look smarter by comparison. Somewhere along the way, he begins to think that SpongeBob really is stupid and that he himself is a genius.
Berserk Button:
"NOBODY CALLS ME TUBBY!"
Also, don't break his heart.
"Patrick's Tantrum" reveals that hearing a bell makes him suffer destructive fits, during which no one is safe.
"MY NAME'S! NOT! RIIIIIIIIIIIIIIICCCCCCCCKKKKK!!!!!!!"
Beware the Nice Ones: Patrick means well, but he can get riled up very easily if his dreams are stolen. He has gone Ax-Crazy over jealousy towards SpongeBob at least twice.
Beware the Silly Ones: Seriously, he can go from being delightfully silly one moment to being an Ax-Crazy psycho the next. "Big Pink Loser" has him being funnily dumb with his failed attempts to do his job right at first, without being directly harmful... only to have him scrape a broomstick against the Krusty Krab floorboards and create a mad dust air, then copy SpongeBob to get an award.
Big Eater: Throughout the series, he is shown to have a big appetite. Exemplified quite well after SpongeBob smells his foul breath.
SpongeBob: Barnacles, Patrick! What did you eat!?
Patrick: Some roast beef, some chicken, a pizza...
SpongeBob: No, I mean just this morning.
Patrick: Some roast beef, some chicken, a pizza...
"Pressure" also epitomizes this, as he brags about sea creatures being able to eat a Deluxe Krabby Patty in one bite when Sandy and the others have a competition about whether land or sea creatures are better, then proceeding to eat the whole thing in one bite.
He's even eaten an entire table of food in "Rock-a-Bye Bivalve" and an entire plate of Krabby Patties in "Pat No Pay".
Big Fun: Patrick is a funny, lovable fat guy whose ditzy moments serve as comic relief. Due to Flanderization and Took a Level in Jerkass, this was mostly prominent in the older seasons, but can still be played straight in the newer seasons every now and then.
The Big Guy: He's the most likely character to do the physical work required in solving a problem.
Big Guy, Little Guy: The fat Dumb Muscle big guy to SpongeBob's physically weak little guy.
Big, Thin, Short Trio: The Big to Squidward or Sandy's Thin and SpongeBob's Short.
Bizarre Taste in Food: "You Don't Know Sponge" reveals that his favorite flavor of ice cream is "Dill Pickle Swirl" with extra mustard and bacon bits.
The Blind Leading the Blind: Patrick frequently tries to incorporate logic into the almost-as-dumb-but-smarter SpongeBob.
Break the Cutie: Happens to him every now and then, particularly in "Nature Pants" and "No Hat for Pat".
Bumbling Sidekick: And considering he's SpongeBob's sidekick, it's an accomplishment that he's the dumbest of the pair.
Butt-Monkey: He suffers a lot of Amusing Injuries, although not to the same level as Squidward or SpongeBob. A good example would be the episode "Suds", where he is treated to the disastrous "starfish treatment" (although, he admittedly deserved it for impersonating a doctor), and "Neptune's Spatula", where he's zapped a number of times by King Neptune, and has his face placed on the back of his pants (he remains like that for the rest of the episode).
Callousness Towards Emergency: In "Stuck in the Wringer", when SpongeBob's health is put at risk due to a wringer super-glued to his body, Patrick — despite his awareness — does nothing to help the situation and instead blames his friend for his current state.
Captain Obvious: He sometimes states the obvious in things.
SpongeBob: Do you think we should take the stuff off the wall?
Patrick: No way! We're not getting paid to move stuff.
SpongeBob: Patrick, we're not getting paid at all...
Patrick: That's what I said; we're not getting paid and that's final.
Character Check: Some later episodes revert him back to a Kindhearted Simpleton, like "Mimic Madness" and "What's Eating Patrick?"
Characterization Marches On:
In season 1, he wasn't portrayed with as much stupidity as he would be by the next season. In fact, he wasn't at all in The Pilot; he actually gave SpongeBob words of wisdom (which may or may not backfire) and encouraged him to get his job, which is a shocking contrast to the bumbling idiot he'd become later on in the series.
A couple of early Season 1 episodes (most notably "Nature Pants" and "Valentine's Day") had Patrick occasionally speak in Hulk Speak ("Patrick sad!", "Patrick itchy!", and "Heart on stick must die!" for example). This tic was dropped early on in favour of having him speak normally.
Childhood Brain Damage: It is often suggested that Patrick's stupidity is the result of frequent head injuries. In "Squidward the Unfriendly Ghost", Patrick mentions that he knows a lot about head injuries, then spaces out mid-sentence. In "Big Pink Loser", SpongeBob tries to discourage Patrick from mimicking him by hitting himself with a hammer, to which Patrick responds, "I've been doing this way before I started copying you."
Childhood Friend: He and SpongeBob have been best friends ever since they were babies, as a flashback in "The Secret Box" shows. This is retconned in Sponge on the Run and Kamp Koral, where they met when they were a little older.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: Patrick always has a tendency to throw SpongeBob under the bus. You’d have to wonder why they’re still friends.
Cloudcuckoolander: Patrick's a big goofball with an absurd way of thinking.
Patrick: You've got it set to "M" for mini, when it should be set to "W" for "Wumbo".
Collector of the Strange: SpongeBob SquarePants: Battle for Bikini Bottom shows he has a sock collection despite not wearing socks.
Comic Trio: The Fool to SpongeBob's The Leader and Squidward's Only Sane Man.
Connected All Along: "Rule of Dumb" reveals that he and Gary are cousins.
Covert Pervert: If him, along with SpongeBob and Mr. Krabs, trying to steal panties from a woman's house in "Mid-Life Crustacean" is anything to go by, then he's more perverted than he seems. Tellingly, this scene led to "Mid-Life Crustacean" being banned in 2021.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Despite his fat body and moronic personality, Patrick is not only incredibly strong but is terrifying when he loses his temper, to the point where he can take on muscular thugs much larger than himself and even monsters on a few occasions. In addition, he's shown to have superpowers in several episodes, including telepathy.
Cute and Psycho: He is normally a lovable idiot but he has unpredictable behaviors and can act like a Lethally Stupid Insufferable Imbecile (especially after he was Flanderized), and he can even be Ax-Crazy at times, with "Nature Pants" and "Valentine's Day" being the most notable examples of the latter.
The Cutie: He's nearly as carefree and enthusiastic as SpongeBob.
Depending on the Writer:
His level of stupidity. At times, he's a Genius Ditz who does have some good ideas, on one occasion even beating out Sandy in coming up with a plan. At others, he's so stupid that he eats a chocolate bar and immediately forgets he did so, and can't even do such simple tasks as sweeping or opening a jar. He even lampshades this in one episode.
Squidward: Patrick, just how dumb are you?
Patrick: It varies.
Whether he actually has a nose or not. He's revealed to have a nose in "Wet Painters", "That's No Lady", and "The Battle for Bikini Bottom" note , but prior to getting plastic surgery in "No Nose Knows", he reveals that he doesn't have one.
How much of a jerk he can be. At times, he has a complete Lack of Empathy and blows off any pain and anguish his actions may cause, while in "Donut of Shame", he's driven to fearful remorse over stealing a donut from SpongeBob.
Desperately Craves Affection: Patrick did not take kindly to receiving no gift in "Valentine's Day". It in fact became so serious to the point where he went on such a major Sanity Slippage and terrorized the boardwalk attendants in pursuit of an affectionate response. Luckily for him, Sandy arrives with his gift to prevent his chaos from reaching a peak.
Despotism Justifies the Means: In "Rule of Dumb", when he becomes the king of Bikini Bottom, he turns into a ruthless despot who believes he has the right to take and do whatever he wants.
Destructive Savior: In the episode "Patrick-Man!", he tries to fight the Dirty Bubble, but in the process completely destroys the Krusty Krab and only defeats the Bubble through sheer dumb luck.
Deuteragonist:
As SpongeBob's best friend, Patrick frequently tags along on his adventures and gets many episodes dedicated to his antics or his friendship with SpongeBob. One of the show's character guides explicitly bills him as the second most important character after SpongeBob himself.
The TV show features a colorful cast of 10 characters, headlined by SpongeBob and his best friend Patrick.
In the first movie, Patrick tags along with SpongeBob to retrieve King Neptune's crown and goes through many of the same struggles SpongeBob himself does, but primarily acts as comic relief while SpongeBob wants to become the Krusty Krab 2 manager.
In the third movie, Patrick once again tags along with SpongeBob to save Gary from King Poseidon and remains just as prominent as his yellow best friend.
Even in the video games, Patrick will consistently fill this role. He's right behind SpongeBob in Battle for Bikini Bottom in terms of story-relevance and spotlight (exceeding that of the final playable character Sandy), the first movie's video game adaptation has him keep his role as the secondary protagonist, and Creature from the Krusty Krab has Patrick's storyline take up a similar amount of levels as SpongeBob's, with him even being the one who takes down the Final Boss at the game's climax.
Diabolus ex Machina: Occasionally, starting in season 7, he'd appear to make everything go bad at the last minute.
Did You Just Flip Off Cthulhu?: Deconstructed. Both times Patrick meets Neptune (two different versions of him, anyway), he cannot help but run his mouth on him — usually in defense of SpongeBob. However, every time he does, it only makes things harder for both him and his friend.
Dirty Coward: "Ghoul Fools" showed that Patrick was willing to sacrifice SpongeBob because he "lived a full life." This was actually lampshaded by Lord Poltergeist, who sarcastically says, "Great friend you got there."
Disguised in Drag: When he thought a salesman was threatening his life, he, with SpongeBob's help, disguised himself as a girl named Patricia. Cue every other male in Bikini Bottom (especially Squidward and Mr. Krabs) falling for him.
The Ditz: One of television's most famous examples of a stupid character. He's so dumb that he makes SpongeBob look intelligent.
Dumb and Drummer: Despite his lack of intelligence, he's really good at drumming, whether he's using actual drums ("Band Geeks") or his own belly ("Krabby Road").
Dumbass Has a Point: Occasionally makes an intelligent observation in spite of his idiocy.
One such instance has him beating out Sandy in coming up with a plan.
In earlier episodes, Patrick tends to be the one to suggest that Squidward doesn't like him and SpongeBob. SpongeBob naturally finds such a notion unthinkable.
Played with in "Wet Painters". After SpongeBob panics over getting paint on Mr. Krabs' first dollar (he was warned not to get paint on it), Patrick points out that Mr. Krabs' first dollar doesn't look any different from a normal dollar and could easily be replaced with any old dollar without Mr. Krabs knowing. The way this is played with is that Patrick immediately uses the dollar SpongeBob asked him to use on a vending machine instead of replacing the dollar that got covered in paint.
In "Porous Pockets", Patrick is unusually more calm and down-to-earth, as he notices SpongeBob throwing all his money away to the various moochers, and warns him not to do it.
Dumb Is Good: Patrick's asinine mindset is rooted in his good heart, and he's much nicer than the "normals" on the show.
Dumb Muscle: Patrick is shown to be incredibly strong on at least a few occasions. This is especially prominent in the video games.
Dumpster Dive: He likes to rummage through dumpsters and garbage cans and is even willing to eat food from them.
Early Installment Character-Design Difference:
In the first season and a few subsequent episodes, his eyebrows were thinner and resembled the letter 'M'. Shortly after, he gained thicker brows that now vaguely resemble the letter 'N'.
In the earlier seasons, he was generally drawn with a mouth full of teeth, but post-first-movie, he's most often illustrated as having a single buck tooth on his upper jaw, to accentuate his childishness.
Easily Impressed: His standards are just as low as SpongeBob's.
Enemy to All Living Things: No form of life is safe around Patrick. Just ask Gary, whom Patrick mercilessly abused and mistreated in the episode "Pet Sitter Pat".
Eskimos Aren't Real: In the first story of the 13th issue of SpongeBob Comics ("The Taste of Fear"), he responds to SpongeBob's concerns that there could be a ghost or a burglar in the Fry Cook Museum by stating that there's no such thing as burglars.
Exposed Animal Bellybutton: He has a navel and provides the trope's page image.
Extreme Omnivore: He has shown himself willing to eat inedible sources, such as pet food, diapers, coffee mugs, the letter "R", even chum.
Face Death with Dignity: In the first movie, after being on the verge of drying out to death and almost succumbing to despair, Patrick is able to notice that he and SpongeBob did make it to Shell City. Once he and SpongeBob realize this they are able to hold their heads high and sing the Goofy Goober theme song in their final moments before succumbing to dehydration. Luckily for them, it did not last long.
Fan Disservice: As if it wasn't bad enough that his usual atire has him, an overweight starfish, walking around without any sort of shirt on, he will sometimes lose his shorts, leaving his butt to be visible for all the world to see. And in the first movie during the Goofy Goober Rock scene, he is shown in high-heeled boots and fishnets stockings. At first it doesn't look too bad because of the angle it's shown from, but then after the song is over, he's still wearing them, and it doesn't look nearly as decent as the first shot would make you believe, plus he has the same upper body regardless.
Fatal Flaw:
His vanity. The smallest dose of success will immediately cause Patrick to develop Acquired Situational Narcissism and disregard the well-being of others, leading to major consequences.
His naïvety also veers into Too Dumb to Live and The Fool territory more often than not.
Fat and Skinny: The Fat to SpongeBob's and Squidward's Skinny.
Fat Bastard: He occasionally shows traits of being an obese jerk, especially in later episodes thanks to Flanderization. "Rule Of Dumb" is a very extreme example where he goes mad with royal power.
Fat Best Friend: He is SpongeBob's best friend and is overweight.
Fat Idiot: He's chubby and a complete moron.
Fat Slob: If "The Battle of Bikini Bottom" is to be believed, he prefers being messy.
Flanderization:
Patrick started out quite dim, but he was actually fairly street smart. However, as the series progressed, Patrick became dumber and dumber until it became the vehicle for all his appearances.
He was also much nicer to SpongeBob as a friend if a bit lazy given his nature as a starfish. His laziness and vanity has become more important then his friendship with SpongeBob, to the point he'll sometimes be more of a hinderance to SpongeBob and do things even if it clearly harms his friend.
Foil: To SpongeBob. They're both ditzy Man Children who share such interests as jellyfishing and bubble blowing, but while SpongeBob is something of a Neat Freak, a Workaholic able to hold down a steady job and often proves to be The Ace at whatever he tries (except driving), Patrick is a Fat Slob, a Lazy Bum who never stays employed for long, and is shown to be so incompetent that he can't even sweep or open a jar without outside help, but can drive surprisingly well.
The Fool: Along with SpongeBob in later seasons, often playing blissfully ignorant winners against Squidward's frustrated loser image.
Forgetful Jones: Patrick's stupidity might have less to do with a genuine lack of intelligence on his part and more to do with him having the worst memory of any cartoon character ever drawn. Whether it's his best friend's name or how to eat, you name it, he'll forget it. This is best exemplified in "Life of Crime", where he forgets he already ate his candy bar right after eating it and comes to the incorrect conclusion that SpongeBob stole it.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: The Phlegmatic. He's loyal to SpongeBob to a fault and can sometimes be modest and thoughtful.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Aside from SpongeBob, the other members of the group don't show the same level of respect for him. Sandy is somewhat accepting of him when he isn't being too dumb, Mr. Krabs usually views him as someone to hire for extra labour with little to no pay, and Squidward openly hates his guts almost as much as he hates SpongeBob.
Gasshole: He belches quite often.
Genius Ditz: Patrick is an idiot most of the time, though he can be shockingly smart when he wants to be. In "Boating School", he was shown to be perfectly accurate behind the wheel, as he could give perfect instructions to SpongeBob simply via a large telescope, sometimes while barely paying attention, and in another episode, he even GOT a boating license despite not knowing everything there is to know about boats. Not to mention his performance on NFL commentary for a CBS-produced Nickelodeon simulcast of the Denver Broncos–Los Angeles Rams game on Christmas Day 2022. After Broncos quarterback Russell Wilson, who had severely regressed in 2022 from his previous elite-level performances with the Seattle Seahawks, threw an interception, Patrick remarked "That's not what he wanted to cook!", both referencing the "Let Russ Cook" meme and skewering Wilson's regression.
Goofy Buckteeth: Patrick is sometimes drawn with a single bucktooth, which is noticeable when he's about to do something stupid.
Goofy Print Underwear: The first movie has him wear his trademark pair of Goofy Goober undergarments.
Half-Dressed Cartoon Animal: A sea star who only wears a pair of shorts.
Has a Type: The first movie, the episode "Welcome to the Bikini Bottom Triangle" and the Cosmic Shake game imply that Patrick has a thing for mermaids.
Healing Factor: He can regenerate his arms in the unlikely case that they get severed. However, detached limbs grow a new body, which is quite accurate for his species.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: He and SpongeBob are best friends.
Hidden Depths:
He's a very good driver, as opposed to SpongeBob, and even got his driver's license before him, as shown in "Driven to Tears". It was even hinted at in "Boating School", where Patrick was helping SpongeBob in his test and nearly succeeded had the latter not admit to cheating.
"A Friendly Game" shows that Patrick is an ace at mini-golf.
Hypocrite: He never follows any of the "advice" he teaches SpongeBob.
In "Grandma's Kisses", he tells SpongeBob to act like a grown-up but later acts like a baby himself. When SpongeBob points out his hypocrisy, he says that being a "grown-up" is boring and that he likes being a baby.
In "Something Smells", when SpongeBob believes that he is shunned by everyone in town because they think he is ugly, Patrick tells him that he should accept his ugliness. Later, Patrick thinks he caught SpongeBob's ugliness and refuses to accept it, declaring that he was once one of the "beautiful people" (in reality, it was their bad breath that caused the townsfolk to ignore them).
In "Yours, Mine, and Mine": Patrick criticizes SpongeBob for not sharing the toy with him, but then he hogs the toy to himself for the rest of the episode.
In "Little Yellow Book", he's among the many people who laugh at SpongeBob's secrets and joins in on lambasting Squidward for doing so when SpongeBob runs away crying, throwing fruit at Squidward and calling him a "diary reader".When Squidward points out that Patrick also read the diary, Patrick blows him off and accuses him of "blaming everyone else."
Iconic Outfit: His green shorts with purple flowers.
Idiot Houdini: Combined with his friend SpongeBob's near-equal Idiot Houdini tendencies, he often gets away with his actions simply because he's a nitwit.
Ignorant of Their Own Ignorance: In "I'm With Stupid", he manages to embody this trope while simultaneously applying it to someone else. He asked SpongeBob to pretend to be dumber than him so that Patrick's parents, who were coming for a visit, wouldn't be ashamed of him; not only does Patrick end up believing that SpongeBob really is stupid and that he himself is a genius, but it turns out that he's so dumb that he mistook his parents for random starfishes who are just as stupid as he is.
Patrick: Dumb people are always blissfully unaware of how dumb they really are. [spaces out and drools]
I Just Want to Be Special: Patrick's jealousy is a recurring theme in the series. "Valentine's Day", "Big Pink Loser", "No Nose Knows", and "Yours, Mine and Mine" show that he'll break down crying and lose self-esteem when witnessing others' success, often to a fatal fault.
I Just Want to Be You: In "Big Pink Loser", his determination to win an award and accomplish something for once in his life drives him to copy SpongeBob's life, wearing SpongeBob's clothes, copying all of his actions, and even painting his rock to resemble the latter's pineapple house.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: He does not take kindly when his ignorance bubble is burst, and the smallest amount of power will immediately go to his head.
Informed Attractiveness: When Patrick crossdresses in "That's No Lady" as a means to hide his identity, he's considered a true feminine beauty by all males in Bikini Bottom (oblivious that he's Patrick). The thing is, he really doesn't look that different from his usual self; only adding pigtails, lipstick, and a dress.
Innocently Insensitive: Like SpongeBob, he can often be simply oblivious to and ignorant of how his behavior affects others. At times, the "innocent" part gets a little dubious. In "Driven to Tears", after SpongeBob fails his driver's test, yet again, Patrick takes it himself, and passes it with a perfect score on his first try with little effort. He wins a boat-mobile for being the one-millionth person to get a license, and immediately starts being incredibly condescending towards the fact that SpongeBob still hasn't gotten his license, and wonders why SpongeBob is so upset.
Insane Troll Logic: He's the one who came up with changing SpongeBob's belt to "Wumbo" after all.
Insufferable Genius: He becomes one following a head-on collision with a brain coral in "Patrick SmartPants", causing him to smugly look down upon others with his newfound intellect, which not only leads to isolation from SpongeBob, but even Squidward and Sandy agreeing he was better as a moron.
Insufferable Imbecile: He ventures into this trope in later seasons thanks to Flanderization. The most infamous example comes from The Splinter when Patrick makes SpongeBob's splinter worse and when SpongeBob rightfully complains to Patrick about it, he thinks that SpongeBob doesn't want his help despite the fact that he was worsening the problem.
It's All About Me: He can act selfish on occasion, such as taking advantage of SpongeBob's friendship and his generosity for his benefit, and joining in with him in forcing Squidward into their activities when he wants no part of it.
Jerkass Ball: He can be very mean and self-centered on occasion, though as usual, this was emphasized more due to Flanderization in later episodes.
Jerkass Realization: After refusing to help SpongeBob with Junior in "Rock-A-Bye Bivalve", SpongeBob shows him all the diapers he had to change (even most of them are loaded from a garbage truck) and Patrick actually feels horrible for all of this and promises to help SpongeBob with Junior.
Patrick: I had no idea! What kind of a father am I?! Oh! I'll make it up to you, buddy. I promise!
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He starts out as a Nice Guy in the pre-movie episodes, but eventually evolves into this. He's prone to Took a Level in Jerkass much more often than SpongeBob himself, who was also flanderized. That said, when he's not being a jerk, he still can be a well-meaning idiot and a good friend to SpongeBob. For instance, he gets angry when Squidward and Plankton suggest killing SpongeBob in "Mimic Madness", he indignantly tells the Flying Dutchman that he can't talk about SpongeBob that way when the ghost pirate makes a remark about SpongeBob being a lousy friend in "The Legend of Boo-kini Bottom", and he gets furious at Bubble Bass for not giving SpongeBob his free lunch as promised in "Moving Bubble Bass".
Karma Houdini: Often gets away with the things he screws up. The most notable moment is in "I'm With Stupid", when he lets SpongeBob pretend he was stupid to impress his parents, but then he went too far and actually believed SpongeBob really WAS stupid. This causes the sponge to run off in a rage... and Patrick gets away with it.
Keeping the Handicap: In one episode, he becomes an Insufferable Genius after his head is accidentally replaced with brain coral. Due to his new intelligence alienating his friends, he decides to replace his head back to his normal oafish self.
Keet: Not to the extent of SpongeBob, but he can still be pretty hyperactive.
Kindhearted Simpleton: Mostly in the pre-movie seasons, he is an idiot with honest intentions.
The Klutz: In addition to his dimwitted nature, Patrick has a rather weak balance and can be quite clumsy. This was an exploit for an entertainment act held at the Krusty Krab in "No Hat Pat", in which customers had to pay to see him falling down in numerous varieties.
Lack of Empathy: At his worst (at his best, he's just too dumb to know any better). It's another case of Depending on the Writer, as in some cases, he just blows off any pain or anguish he causes, while in others, he can be brought to tearful remorse for stealing a donut that is actually his gift.
The Lancer: He usually serves as SpongeBob's partner during their adventures, as well as his right-hand man if they happen to be in positions of authority.
Large Ham: Moreso in earlier episodes, but still somewhat prone to being loud and dramatic in later ones.
Lazy Bum: In contrast to the hard-working SpongeBob, he tends to be unwilling and uninterested in doing any physical labor.
Lethally Stupid: Whenever he shows up in newer episodes, it's almost guaranteed everything will go horribly wrong because of his idiocy.
Likes Older Women: Played for Laughs in the episode "Chocolate With Nuts." After SpongeBob and Patrick get enough money to go to a fancy dinner with dates, their dates are revealed to be… the elderly women from earlier in the episode.
SpongeBob: So… how long have you two ladies known each other?
[Beat]
Chocolate Lady: What? What did he say?
Literal-Minded: He interprets metaphors literally as often as SpongeBob.
Love Hungry: See Ax-Crazy above; he has a tendency to react badly when under the impression that his friendship with SpongeBob is in jeopardy.
Made of Iron: Just like SpongeBob, there isn't a lot of things in the series that can put him in the hospital.
Malaproper: Especially in The Patrick Star Show, it's a common gag for Patrick to get words mixed up in his dialogue.
Manchild: Patrick is an adult and he's almost as childish as SpongeBob, if not more.
Manipulative Bastard: This is often how SpongeBob goes along in one of his schemes. An example would be "Squidtastic Voyage". SpongeBob was told to watch the submarine, and Patrick asked him if he looked after it from the inside as well.
The McCoy: With Squidward as The Spock and SpongeBob as The Kirk. Patrick is incredibly stupid, and he will always resort to Insane Troll Logic in pursuit of his ideals.
The Millstone: Particuarly starting with Season 4. Whenever SpongeBob or anyone has a plan, Patrick is sure to screw it up, or do something stupid to make it worse.
Mooning: In the episode "Mooned!", he is the first to bare his bottom to keep the Moon Jellyfish from disappearing when the natural moonlight begins to fade, which leads to the Jellyspotters, Mr. Krabs, Larry the Lobster, several random Bikini Bottom citizens (both male and female), The Jellyson Group host Jeff Jellyson and his guests Fabrica Olay and Fish-O the Clown also exposing their bare behinds at the jellyfish.
Naked People Are Funny: The series has several jokes involving him being nude, such as his inflatable pants exploding in "Patty Hype", him and SpongeBob pranking Bikini Bottom by pretending to be ghosts after stripping naked and using invisible spray on themselves in "Pranks a Lot" and hang-gliding in his birthday suit in The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie.
Neet: Does not have a job. He does work at the Krusty Krab in a few episodes, though these instances shortly result in him being fired.
Never My Fault: Especially in the earlier post-movie seasons, he's prone to moments of blame-shifting. The worst offenders are in "Stuck in the Wringer" and "Big Sister Sam".
Nice Guy: During the first three seasons and in the first movie, for the most part. While not without his flaws, he's a good-hearted guy most of the time and a true friend to SpongeBob. He unfortunately morphs into a remorselessly destructive moron around Season 4, though he still shows shades of his earlier characterization from time to time.
Nice, Mean, and In-Between: The in-between, at least in earlier seasons; he was a Nice Guy overall, though he wasn't as overly affectionate as SpongeBob, nor was he as snide as Squidward. Later seasons, however, and even some earlier episodes, show that Patrick can be plenty mean in his own right.
No Listening Skills: Even worse than SpongeBob. His stupidity prevents him from heeding SpongeBob's advice to stay out of trouble. In "The Card", SpongeBob tries to advise Patrick to take extra special care of the new Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy trading card he just purchased, but Patrick spaces out and catches none of it, proceeding to ruin the card in various ways.
Non Sequitur, *Thud*: In "Frankendoodle", Patrick suffers a few head injuries from DoodleBob's antics. When he gets a wrench dropped on his head that falls into his hands, he asks SpongeBob, "Where's the leak, ma'am?" When he gets knocked silly by a bowling ball, SpongeBob asks if he's okay, only to have Patrick shout back "FINLAND!"
The Noseless: He doesn't have a visible nose, though he's been portrayed as having nostrils on occasion. Lampshaded in "No Nose Knows" when he's jealous of all his peers having noses and undergoes plastic surgery in order to get one.
Obfuscating Stupidity: Possibly. Some fans suspect that Patrick is not really stupid, but a sociopath who does stupid and often assholish things on purpose just because he knows his low intelligence (or façade of it) will keep him from punishment. Throwaway comments in some episodes support this view, such as "Home Sweet Pineapple"note , "I Had an Accident"note , "The Card"note , and "Tentacle-Vision"note .
The Obi-Wannabe: He's essentially SpongeBob's main source of "wisdom", which goes about as well as you'd expect seeing as he's The Ditz and all.
Parental Neglect: In "Rock a Bye Bivalve", he repeatedly refuses to help the baby scallop. Though that in his eyes seems to be a traditional father figure.
Pear-Shaped Gentle Giant: Patrick is rather big and strong, with a large belly and a pointed head. He's also harmless and really friendly... for the most part.
Predator-Prey Friendship: In real life, sea stars are predators that hunt and eat coral, sea sponges, clams, oysters, sand dollars, and mussels. Considering that he remains best friends with SpongeBob despite the fact his kind is often seen as food by real-life sea stars and with the occasional predator and prey-esque rivalry of each other's species bubbling to the surface (at one point even resulting in them succumbing to their animal instincts and trying to eat each other after being trapped in a cave with no food) proves this to be the case with his friendship with SpongeBob.
Prone to Tears: Not to the extent of SpongeBob, but he does tend to break down crying quite easily.
Psychopathic Manchild: During his more villainous moments, he can be as dangerous and deranged as he is childish. For example, in "Valentine's Day", he threw a destructive temper tantrum when he believed that SpongeBob hadn't given him an actual Valentine's Day gift.
Ridiculously Cute Critter: Less so than SpongeBob, but he's still chubby, pink, and cute-looking. He also has purple eyelids and flowered swimming trunks.
Rubber Man: As the Elastic Waistband in "Mermaid Man and Barnacle Boy V", he has stretching abilities.
Running Gag: In the first season, he has a tendency to fall off his rock every time he opens it.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: He's the manly man to SpongeBob's sensitive guy. Both are quite childish, but SpongeBob speaks in a high-pitched Effeminate Voice, while Patrick speaks in a low Simpleton Voice. SpongeBob is very sensitive and overemotional but usually never violent, while Patrick is blunt, thuggish, and tends to fly into destructive rages upon being slighted. The episode "Rock-A-Bye Bivalve" highlights this dynamic, with SpongeBob acting as the "mom" who does all the housework, while Patrick acts as the "dad" (on account of not wearing a shirt) who seemingly goes to work.
Seven Deadly Sins: Embodies sloth. Patrick spends his entire life doing as little as possible, mostly eating or doing recreational activities, and is an incredibly Heavy Sleeper.
Simpleton Voice: Even his voice sounds stupid and childish.
Sixth Ranger: Whenever the Krusty Krew (consisting of SpongeBob, Squidward and Mr. Krabs) needs a fourth member, Patrick's usually the guy to fill the gap.
Snark Ball: He's sometimes made witty remarks in spite of his idiocy.
Species Surname: Patrick Star is a starfish.
Spoiled Brat: When Patrick's Manchild traits and selfish tendencies are at their worst, to the point where he is a whiny baby who complains when he doesn't get his way, like in "Yours, Mine, and Mine". At the beginning of that episode, Patrick wants SpongeBob to buy a Krabby Kiddie Meal for them to share, only for Patrick to eat it all for himself. Later, when Mr. Krabs manufactures a Patty Pal toy for the two to share, Patrick goes out of his way to selfishly keep the toy. He even goes so far as to eat the toy, screaming that if he can't have it, no one can.
Stock Sound Effects: His Big Eater moments are often punctuated by the sound of a Hoover vacuum cleaner.
Stout Strength: He's overweight, but still quite strong.
Straw Loser: SpongeBob is often a brainless irritance to others, but when paired alongside the even dumber Patrick, he can often come off as vaguely competent and levelheaded.
Strong as They Need to Be: Typically, he's strong enough to lift and throw things as heavy as a dumpster with ease, but in "Krusty Krushers", he couldn't even tear a piece of paper in half and got a paper cut trying to do so.
Strong, but Unskilled: He's deemed incapable of learning formal karate training aside from a basic chop, but his monstrous strength allows him to perform a perfect slice on even the hardest of substances. Unfortunately, he also lacks the discipline to use his skills responsibly and ends up terrorizing the town by going on an uncontrollable karate-chopping rampage.
Super-Strength: At times, he is able to throw boulders as if they were pebbles and break through steel walls. On at least one occasion, he actually managed to overpower Sandy.
Sweet Tooth: He loves to eat ice cream and many other desserts.
Temporarily a Villain: At his worst, he has his moments of being antagonistic in some episodes such as "Pet Sitter Pat".
Third-Person Person: He occasionally speaks in the third person in the pre-movie seasons, but has stopped doing so in the post-movie ones.
Tomato in the Mirror: In "Rule of Dumb", Squidward, whose house was torn down to make room for a Ferris Wheel, makes everyone in Bikini Bottom realize that "king" Patrick has no legal right to demand tribute from them, which causes the construction crew, as well as the people who were going to give Patrick more of their stuff, to leave immediately. Right after, Patrick goes on an angry tirade and shouts at SpongeBob, insisting that he is not a corrupt ruler. When Patrick orders SpongeBob to get him a drink, he surmises that SpongeBob snuck away during the tirade, and gets the drink himself, which is when he sees his monstrous reflection in the mirror, and realizes what the crown and title has turned him into.
Too Incompetent to Operate a Blanket: In "Big Pink Loser", he's shown needing to actually be talked through the simplest tasks, such as sweeping floors or opening jars.
Took a Level in Dumbass: He becomes much dumber in later seasons. Whenever SpongeBob is subject to a decrease in intelligence, Patrick is made dumber to always ensure SpongeBob looks like a genius by comparison regardless.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Even more so than SpongeBob, the later seasons had him more prone to jerkish moments. The prime example? The episode "Rule Of Dumb", where he lets his role as king go to his head and becomes a selfish grouch who frightens SpongeBob.
Took a Level in Kindness: By Season 9B, his Jerkass Ball moments have been notably decreased.
Trademark Favorite Food: He's been shown many times to love ice cream above all other foods.
Unsympathetic Comedy Protagonist: If the writers decide to hand him the Jerkass Ball for the episode, he's not very likable.
Vague Age: He's apparently old enough to live on his own and have a job, but is childish to the point where everyone, including himself, refers to him as a kid. And unlike SpongeBob, his driver's license never revealed his date of birth, though it's assumed that he's around his 30's like SpongeBob is.
Vocal Evolution:
His voice has gotten quite a lot deeper and more simple sounding in later episodes. Almost to a creepy extent, as he used to sound like a goofball, but now sounds a tad thuggish.
Following the second movie, Patrick's voice has become slightly higher, akin to how he sounded in seasons 2 and 3.
Walking Shirtless Scene: Usually shown without a shirt on.
We Want Our Idiot Back!: In "Patrick Smartpants", Patrick becomes a super genius after accidentally attaching brain coral to his head. The smarter characters like Sandy and Squidward initially enjoy this, but even they get annoyed at Patrick over time when he calls them dumb and talentless respectively. Even Patrick himself gets sick of his intellect and seeks to find a way to get rid of it, as he realizes that he's alienated everyone, including SpongeBob.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: In "Home Sweet Pineapple", he starts smashing SpongeBob with his house in his sleep, screaming "SPIDERRRS!"
With Friends Like These...:
Though Patrick is SpongeBob's best friend, he often takes advantage of SpongeBob and turns on him at a moment's notice, such as making him out to be an idiot to his parents in "I'm with Stupid" and trying to sacrifice SpongeBob to Lord Poltergeist to save his own hide in "Ghoul Fools".
Lord Poltergeist: Yeah... great friend you got there.
In "Something Smells", SpongeBob, oblivious to the fact that people are avoiding him for his bad breath, is told by Patrick people run away from him because he's ugly. When SpongeBob finally comes to terms with his "ugliness", Patrick eats the stuff that gave SpongeBob bad breath, and people start avoiding him. When SpongeBob tries to help him come to terms with being ugly, Patrick berates him for making him ugly.
SpongeBob: Just remember what we talked about. There's power in pride.
Patrick: That may be fine for you, but I was one of the beautiful people. Now look at me! I'm almost as ugly as you!
Woobie, Destroyer of Worlds: If episodes like "Big Pink Loser" and "Valentine's Day" are anything to go by, Patrick's odd mean streak is exhibited out of his lack of talent and luck in contrast to others.
Would Hurt a Child: When SpongeBob teaches him karate in "Karate Star", he uses it to go around town destroying property, and attempts to chop a baby until SpongeBob stops him at one point.
Wrong Genre Savvy: In "Stuck in the Wringer", after he stupidly glues SpongeBob into his wringer. SpongeBob feels he'll never be able to do anything now, but Patrick gives him a Rousing Speech that he can go on and persevere despite the adversity. As the episode goes on, it turns out Patrick was wrong: SpongeBob really can't do anything while stuck in the wringer.
Yandere: He acts like this towards SpongeBob in "Nature Pants" when the latter refuses to leave the Jellyfish Fields after abandoning his life to go live with the jellyfish.