Bad Liar: It's a serious problem of his.
Butt-Monkey: Increasingly rivaling Jared for this status within the group, much to his own chagrin.
Can't Hold His Liquor: It's a real problem for him.
Casanova Wannabe: Most of his attempts to hook up with women end in failure. His most successful relationship ends when his girlfriend turns out to be a cyber-terrorist.
Characterization Marches On: In the pilot episode "Minimum Viable Product" he was just as stoic and snarky as Gilfoyle was. Throughout the entire rest of the first season, he drops the act and becomes dorkier, a characterization he sticks with for the rest of the series.
Divergent Character Evolution: The situation with him and Gilfoyle is a little like this. Originally they were defined primarily by their rivalry with each other, but as the series has gone on they've developed more unique character traits distinct from each other. They're still in almost every scene together, though.
Heel Realization: He comes to recognize his awfulness when discussing Karma with Gilfoyle, with several stories making it clear even as a child that Dinesh has had Laser-Guided Karma for being a Bitch in Sheep's Clothing. When he was only a child he wanted to steal his cousin's jump rope, and later spitefully tied it to a truck in envy for his cousins finding candy while he was away.
Hopeless Suitor: Tries to impress many girls but rarely succeeds.
Ivy League for Everyone: Went to Caltech (practically a West Coast Ivy), and did graduate studies at Yale and Cambridge. You'd never guess by looking at him.
Jerkass: Increasingly becomes one as the series goes on. He even admits to being vindictive and petty more than once.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Despite his self-centered and petty nature, he really is a nice guy and values his friendships. In the series finale, he distances himself from the plan to sabotage/launch Pied Piper - a move which Gilfoyle describes as both courageous and cowardly - but immediately acts when he finds out that the sabotage was detected minutes before the launch, making his way to the supernode at the top of their building and implementing the sabotage code just in time.
Karmic Jackpot: Shared with Gilfoyle above, ultimately Dinesh was the one who sabotaged Pied Piper before it could threaten global security. As a result of the fallout, he's able to start his own cybersecurity company with Gilfoyle.
The Load: Becomes more pronounced after Erlich leaves the group. Dinesh is a great programmer, but he's distinctly below Richard in and definitely below Gilfoyle, in terms of skills . On top of that, his personality frequently causes him to create new problems or make preexisting ones grow even worse, often without noticing.
Mr. Vice Guy: Less pronounced than Richard but he has his moments of genuine kindness despite his self-centered nature.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: He has a tendency to cause this. At one point, he sneaks into the garage to have a go at setting up one of Gilfoyle's homemade servers and ends up breaking $50,000 worth of equipment (and blacking out the neighborhood) with the single flip of a switch.
Only One Name: His surname is Chugtai, but this is virtually never mentioned.
Straw Loser: Dinesh is only allowed to one-up Gilfoyle if it results in a Pyrrhic Victory for him.
Those Two Guys: With Gilfoyle. They're in almost every scene together and ultimately open their own cybersecurity company together in the Distant Finale.
Throw the Dog a Bone:
In Season 3, he uses the algorithm to develop a video chat app for his personal use. The app is well received and so the team decides to pivot Pied Piper to that instead. In Season 4, when Richard decides to leave the company, he appoints Dinesh as CEO. However, Yank the Dog's Chain kicks in quickly (see below).
In the series finale, Dinesh ultimately saves the world from the monstrosity that PiperNet would have become after initially having himself removed from the plans to intentionally tank the company because he figured he'd be too selfish to actually go through with it.
Vitriolic Best Buds: Dinesh and Gilfoyle spend most of the first season as rivals trying to out-do each other, still give no sign of liking each other in the least, and argue and mock each other constantly, yet they never seem to be separated. When Jared points out that they are basically each other's best friend, they both immediately tell him to shut up.
What Does This Button Do?: He can't stand not being allowed to help Gilfoyle build the garage server, and his obsession leads to disastrous results.
Yank the Dog's Chain: After being thrown a bone his way as seen on the entry above, Dinesh and the entire PiperChat company gets hit with this hard in "Terms of Service" when he finds out that his video chat app is in violation of the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act due to not having any parental restrictions or age requirements which means the company could be fined up to $21 billion. He gets a brief Hope Spot when Richard tells him that since the company is technically a corporation, they might not have to pay for anything because the company isn't worth anything at the time. However, Jared then brings up the fact that since Dinesh purposely didn't include a terms of service to the chat, Dinesh could be personally liable for $21 billion. Then Gilfoyle pops a bottle of champagne to celebrate Dinesh's fuck-up.