Ambiguous Situation: His fate at the end of the series is left completely unanswered, with him seemingly disappearing from society completely. There is some evidence to suggest that Jian Yang killed him to assume his identity, but even that is inconclusive.
Catholic School Girls Rule: Holds this opinion, as shown when Monica revealed she went to a Catholic school.
Cold Ham: He's prone to making hammy, over-the-top statements without so much as raising his voice.
Comically Missing the Point: Constantly, usually when he doesn't grasp how much of an overbearing jerk he can be and nowhere near as smart as he thinks.
When he was in college, he was nicknamed "Kool-Aid" and assumes it was because of how cool he was. It was actually because, like the Kool-Aid Man, he'd burst into other people's conversations and was fat and loud. Even after Richard shows the video and openly telling him, Erlich still doesn't get it.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: Despite his usual idiocy, Erlich does have moments of genuine invaluable business insight. For example, while Richard is bemoaning Hooli's acquisition of EndFrame and the prospect of them getting a Middle-Out Compression platform first, Erlich points out that this acquisition proves that the platform has a concrete monetary value and thus he can use that as leverage to force Barker to change priorities... all while utterly stoned off his ass.
He also does make valid points during the "Mean Jerk Time" sequence, and can write out formulas in the same way as the rest of the cast.
A Degree in Useless: Word of God says he went to a liberal arts school and got a "BA in Ultimate Frisbee" there.
Delusions of Eloquence: Sees himself as erudite Steve Jobs-type when in reality he's a rude, pretentious and slovenly stoner.
Driven to Suicide: Possibly near the end of "The Keenan Vortex". After Keenan Feldspar backstabs him, Erlich goes home and sets the palapa behind the Incubator on fire while he's sitting under the palapa. The attempt fails as the morning after shows that Erlich is completely unharmed but unresponsive.
Erudite Stoner: He's definitely a stoner. He's not as erudite as he thinks he is, however.
He does have a philosophical side and once things get serious and you cut through his bragging he actually has provided Richard with a lot of useful advice and guidance.
The Friend Nobody Likes: He doesn't take as much crap in the group as Jared, but between his overblown ego and generally abrasive personality, nobody really likes being around him. People usually only hang around him because he offers resources that they need but can't afford (like housing, beer, or weed). The season 2 episode "Homicide", in which Pied Piper partners up with an energy drink company owned by an old college acquaintance of Erlich's reveals that he was definitely this in college.
TJ Miller is considered this to the rest of the cast in real life due to Troubled Production missing out on multiple shooting days, sleeping after every shoot and bullying others with his Know-Nothing Know-It-All attitude
Heroic BSoD: In "The Keenan Vortex", Erlich suffers from one after Keenan Feldspar backstabs him in order to work for Jack Barker at Hooli. He is seen to be in a non-responsive state near the end of the episode.
Hoist by His Own Petard: He explains to Jian Yang how California laws that heavily favor tenants over landlords leave Jared unable to get his condo back from the guy he was renting it to on Airbnb... leading Jian Yang to realize that he can keep staying at Erlich's house for up to a year without Erlich being able to do a damn thing about it.
Erlich tricks Big Head into giving him access to his fortune and uses it to throw a big party celebrating himself, but in "Bachmanity Insanity" he discovers that Big Head was broke and his ploy has him on the hook for $1 million he doesn't have. He has to sell his shares of Pied Piper for $713,0000 debt, when they could be worth billions in a short while.
Subverted when these events lead to Erlich owning half of Pied Piper, though it's in worse shape than ever.
He later tries to use the students in Big Head's Stanford CS class as labor for See Food, they immediately realize what he's up to and steal his idea, rendering it worthless.
Jerkass: Partially just because it's his egotistical personality, partially because he sees it as necessary to be one because Richard is too meek and trusting to be a good CEO on his own.
Jerkass Has a Point: There are occasions when he can be quite insightful and good at picking up people's ulterior motives.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Erlich is a childish egomaniac looking to profit off of others' work and has no moral qualms about sleeping with other men's wives. But he is also protective of Richard and when he finds out that Richard is being bullied by neighborhood children, promptly goes out and beats up a boy who couldn't have been more than 13 years old.
Kavorka Man: He's a boorish, egotistical stoner whose appearance has been compared to that of a manatee - but he has managed to convince more than one married woman to sleep with him.
The Load: While he has occasional moments of brilliance, and his bravado at times compensates for Richard's timidity, Erlich is generally much more of a hindrance than an asset.
Mushroom Samba: Takes a fistful of psychotropic mushrooms and trips balls while trying to think up a good company name.
Occidental Otaku: Erlich is something of a Japanophile and attempts to copy aspects of Japanese business culture (which he says is the most advanced in the world), such as ritualized gift-giving.
Pet the Dog: During season 1, episode 8, when the team is worried that Richard has locked himself in his room for over two hours, Erlich literally knocks down the door to check on him. When they see that Richard is fine and just in a coding frenzy, Erlich ushers the others out and replaces the door to give Richard his privacy.
Put on a Bus: Is last seen sprawled on the floor of some unidentified Tibetan house smoking opium in "Server Error."
Rich in Dollars, Poor in Sense: Clearly could have sold his company for far more but just thought about enough to live on and thus often fails to grasp that being rich has its costs.
It's best shown when he tricks Big Head into giving up control of the latter's $20 million fortune. However, Erlich has neglected to check the finances to discover that Big Head has already blown through his money on stuff such as moving his mansion pool and then moving it back to where it was. At a huge party at Alcatraz, Erlich is rocked to discover that thanks to his massive spending, he and Nelson are both broke.
Small Name, Big Ego: In spades. He sold his company for just enough money to live on but continues to act like he's a fantastic Silicon Valley hotshot and genius who's a mentor to others. In truth, most in the business have no idea who he is and his "protegees" hate him.
Sophisticated as Hell: Erlich sees himself as a sophisticated man with a taste for the finer things, which contrasts humorously with his crass manners and unkempt appearance. He'll wear kimonos and buy expensive artisan cheeses while swearing and ripping huge bong hits.
Vision Quest: Erlich is fond of these; he says he found the name for his previous company, Aviato (actually he says it "found him") on one, and he tries again in the third episode of the first season when the team is considering re-naming Pied Piper.
Wrong Genre Savvy: As noted above, he thinks he's a cultured and respected power player in the tech world when he's really a stoned egomaniac with barely any recognition.