Ascended Extra: At the beginning of the show Jian Yang mostly serves to be a prop in Erlich's B plots and doesn't have much importance. Around Season 5, after Erlich has been Put on a Bus, is when Jian Yang starts to gain a lot more prominence.
Beware the Silly Ones: He starts off as a silly one note character who irritates Erlich. However as the series goes on he ends up creating an app that sells for millions, fakes Erlich's death to own his house, kicks out the Pied Piper crew, and is working on making Chinese ripoffs of American websites including Pied Piper. By the Distant Finale he has apparently become a crime boss in South East Asia and stolen Erlich's identity, whom he may or may not have killed for it.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: After spending most of the series as an innocuous-seeming Funny Foreigner, the later episodes reveal him to be disturbingly ruthless, self-serving and manipulative, employing downright despicable actions such as extortion, violence and slave labor simply to make a buck.
Comically Serious: The fact that he maintains a completely straight face and deadpan affect even when saying and doing the most ridiculous things is his primary source of comedy.
Faking the Dead: The Distant Finale shows that he faked his own death and has apparently assumed Erlich's identity.
A Fool and His New Money Are Soon Parted: Ran into this after squandering the money he gained from his SeeFood app.
Full-Name Basis: Everybody calls him Jian Yang. In season 5, he states Jian is actually his last name. Though the guys in the incubator probably neither know nor care.
Funny Foreigner: He comes from rural China and annoys Erlich by leaving fish carcasses in the sink and burning trash. He's usually paired with Erlich, who constantly struggles to get concepts through to him. He later uses this position to screw Erlich over.
Kick the Dog: Throws out the Pied Piper residents after he gets ownership of the incubator. He also has no qualms exploiting other people, even children (with fake camp scams), to run his businesses.
Laser-Guided Karma: After everything he put the Pied Piper crew through during Season 5, he ends up being forced to let them back into the Incubator due to stupidly gambling all of his money away in the season finale.
Laughably Evil: After he fakes Erlich's death and kicks out everyone out of the incubator, he quickly becomes one of the most vile people on the show. Resorting to extortion and slave labor to all for the sake of greed. His silly nature and Funny Foreigner attitude are still present though, making him this trope to a T. However despicable his actions become, one can't really take them seriously.
Malicious Misnaming: Always calls Erlich "Eric". While this initially seems to simply be a result of his accent, his behavior in later episodes heavily implies that he does it deliberately just to spite him.
Prank Call: After Jian Yang realizes that Erlich has almost no power to evict him, he begins to amuse himself by repeatedly attempting to prank call him in a completely inept fashion. (Calling from his own number and from the next room.)
Sadist: He takes a lot of pleasure from making Erlich suffer.
Satellite Character: Basically only exists as Erlich's occasional sidekick/foil. Averted in season 4, as he founds SeeFood and becomes independently wealthy.
The Thing That Would Not Leave: Erlich has trouble getting rid of him due to California state law giving little power to the landlord.
Took a Level in Jerkass: As his relationship with Erlich grows more hostile, Jian Yang begins actively attacking Erlich and revels in his misfortune.
In Season 5, he fakes Erlich's death, obtains his house and 10% of Pied Piper, and kicks out all the other residents of the incubator.