Born Lucky: For much of the show, no matter what happens to him, Big Head always somehow manages to come out of it even more successful than he was before, despite not ever really doing anything or being particularly skilled. It seems to catch up with him in Season 3, but it gets subverted once again in the Season 3 finale, when Bachmanity purchases Pied Piper, making Big Head one of the company's owners. And then it's Double Subverted in Season 4 when he ends up at Stanford. At first, after looking at his qualifications, the interviewer nearly laughs him out of the office, but upon hearing he was on the cover of Wired, asks to talk to him more. He's so dumb he assumes he's a student, but upon going to his first class, realizes he's a guest lecturer. The Distant Finale reveals that he becomes the president of Stanford.
Decoy Protagonist: Set up as Richard's best friend and right hand man in the first episode, but gets demoted to a side character about halfway through it.
The Ditz: Post-Flanderization. He's this show's equivalent to Kevin Malone.
Dumb Is Good: Big Head is hands down the nicest person on the show. He's also by far the stupidest, lacking both common sense and coding ability.
Fake Ultimate Hero: Positioned as one by Gavin in Season 2, who emphasizes his connection to the Pied Piper team to make his involvement with Nucleus seem more promising. It sticks, and he remains a respected public figure into Season 3, despite being an oblivious, talentless idiot.
Flanderization: In the first episode, he makes wry and sarcastic comments about life in Silicon Valley, and his coding skills are said to be unexceptional. As the first season progresses, however, he gets dumber and more clueless, until he settles into the childishly innocent moron he remains for the rest of the show.
The Fool: Easily the ditziest character on the show, yet everything tends to work out perfectly for Big Head.
Kindhearted Simpleton: A very stupid but nevertheless friendly and outgoing coder who is repeatedly shown to have absolutely no idea what he's doing.
Nice Guy: Genuinely pleasant to everyone he meets, wishes no ill will upon anyone, and seems almost incapable of getting angry. Richard even refers to him as one of the nicest people he has ever met in the middle of ranting about how much of an idiot he is.
Nice Guys Finish Last: Subverted frequently for laughs.
During the arbitration between Hooli and Pied Piper, his mild-mannered honesty convinces the judge that Big Head was responsible for Pied Piper's algorithm and is just too modest to admit it.
He buys a huge house, and decides to share it with up-and-coming programmers just to be nice. His inhabitants are so grateful that they willingly give him a share of their companies.
This is shortly later played completely straight as Erlich talks him into partnering up to form a VC firm called "Bachmanity". It becomes apparent in "Bachmanity Insanity" that it's just a ploy for Erlich to make Big Head his platonic sugar daddy. By the end of the episode, Big Head is completely broke after Erlich goes on a spending spree, having been given access to Big Head's bank account. This becomes subverted itself when the blog that Erlich buys sets forth a small series of events that end up with them each owning half of Pied Piper.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Is always called Big Head. Gavin sometimes calls him Bag Head.
Reassignment Backfire: Gets frequently promoted by Hooli for publicity reasons.
Rich in Dollars, Poor in Sense: Not surprisingly, when he ends up with a $20 million buyout, Nelson soon blows through the money on frivolous things such as moving his mansion pool and then moving it back to where it was. His big mistake is letting Erlich take control of his finances and it takes about two days for him to render Nelson bankrupt.
Spanner in the Works: Used as a pawn by Hooli in order to support the lawsuit against Pied Piper. The only things to come out of it is Big Head informing Richard.
Token Good Teammate: During his time work for Hooli he was the only one from that company to be a Nice Guy which contrasts with the other employees who are total Jerkasses.
Trademark Favorite Food: Rarely seen without a Big Gulp in hand.