A Day in the Limelight: "Game Day" mostly focuses on Avon dealing with both the annual basketball game between the Barksdale Organization and Prop Joe's Eastside Gang, and then later Omar trying to kill him.
Affably Evil: He's a drug kingpin and murderer but doesn't act with malice aforethought for the sake of it, he's genuinely charming and cares deeply about those he is close to, is very good to those who work under him and has many moments of kindness throughout the series.
Awesome by Analysis: Despite not being as seemingly educated or as intelligent as Stringer Bell, Avon is nonetheless very shrewd and intuitive. He was able to outmaneuver Daniels during a car tailing. Furthermore in season 5 he figured out Marlo's plan to get access to Proposition Joe's drug supplier in order to have a monopoly on the drug trade in Baltimore as well undermine the Co-Op just by having a conversation with an inmate who's affiliated with the supplier.
Badass Boast: Finger-wagging Daniels after shaking off the police tail.
Batman Gambit: In season 2, he ensures his early release from prison by orchestrating a mass poisoning at the prison, then offering to testify against the "culprit".
Benevolent Boss: Avon generally gets along with his gang. Most of them he's worked with since childhood, and while he sets big expectations, he generally rewards people well and knows how to motivate them.
Big Bad: For Season 1, as the undisputed head of the Barksdale Organization that has taken over West Baltimore. He's Major Crimes' first target.
Big Bad Duumvirate: With Stringer Bell in Season 3, with Avon running the war he starts against Marlo and Stringer trying to become a property developer and go legitimate. Ultimately ends up being a Big Bad Ensemble because they end up betraying each other.
Big Bad Wannabe: By Season 3, he and Stringer have lost their edge. Despite being back in the game, it's clear that Avon is struggling to hold onto his once absolute authority. Stringer begins to wrestle power away from him and he can't do much besides be sullen about it. Furthermore he is shown to be on the losing side of a vicious gang war against the more dangerous and ruthless Marlo Stanfield. By the time he is ready to make a comeback, the police have closed in and it's too late.
Blood Knight: As he tells Stringer, who ultimately only truly cares about money and chasing social class, "I bleed red, you bleed green."
But for Me, It Was Tuesday: After going to prison, Avon sees Wee-Bey being constantly harassed by a guard. Turns out Wee-Bey killed the guard's cousin on Avon's orders, but when Wee-Bey tries to remind Avon and tell him about the details, Avon doesn't remember a thing about it.
Avon: Need a scorecard to keep up with your lethal ass.
The Casanova: Handsome, charismatic, powerful and a self-made man who very much likes the ladies and is happy spending money on them. He's described as not having a permanent residence because he can bounce from girlfriend to girlfriend during the week with no trouble. This actually creates one of the few weak spots he has, as he had one of his girls killed for threatening to go to the cops and the murder case provides prosecutable evidence.
Damn, It Feels Good to Be a Gangster!: Best fits the image of the "classic gangster." A ruthless kingpin during the day, a club-partying playboy during the night, all with a good demeanor and prodigious sex appeal. This is shown to be a big part of his success, as the people working for him enjoy being around him. Stringer, by contrast, is not as fun a boss and struggles to keep the crew happy when Avon is away.
Determinator: Stubborn to a fault, and being challenged, as Marlo challenges him for supremacy of the West Side, only makes him twice as determined to achieve his goals. He catches some buckshot to the shoulder in a later season and is only seen grinning and whooping as it gets taken care of, mostly just excited that they're finally getting in the mix.
Prop Joe: You ever know Avon Barksdale to back away from anything?
The Dreaded: He's charming and well-liked by those who work for him, but Avon is still a powerful drug lord who thinks nothing of having people killed and everyone who knows of him is cautious about ever getting on his bad side.
During a baseball game in the prison, he deliberately crosses the field during play just to see everyone spontaneously stop out of respect for him. They only resume when he's three-quarters across.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: Avon cares deeply about his family. In addition to his sister and nephew, he's also paid for the permanent care of his comatose brother (who was shot in the head and is in a permanent vegetative state). While his commitment to them is challenged in later seasons, he ultimately ends up arranging the death of his right-hand man Stringer despite the hit in profit this will cause because he killed D'Angelo earlier.. He's also fiercely loyal to his crew and commands in loyalty in return.
Even Evil Has Standards: He may be a bloodthirsty kingpin with no compunctions about killing people who threaten his profits, but even he's appalled by Stringer's decision to order a hit on Omar while the latter is escorting his elderly grandmother to church on Sunday morning. He also generally doesn't kill people for insulting his name, with the exception of Omar and his crew.
Et Tu, Brute?: Betrays and is betrayed by Stringer Bell, for the sake of the business at the end of Season 3.
The Extremist Was Right: While his war with Marlo is motivated mainly by his pride and stubbornness, he's one of the few criminals in charge who recognizes that the Co-Op's plan to deal with him via peaceful negotiation is ineffectual, and is incredulous at Stringer's assurance that Prop Joe can contain him. He's ultimately proven correct by Season 5, where Marlo outplays and murders Joe in order to dissolve the Co-Op and take over the drug trade in Baltimore.
Fatal Flaw: Mixing family with business, which is something everyone in the game has done in his time.
Framing the Guilty Party: He sets Tilghman up to smuggle tainted drugs into the prison. When the hot shots kill inmates and prompt an investigation, Avon comes forward and names Tilghman as the culprit, using this as leverage to get his parole hearing moved up.
From Nobody to Nightmare: McNulty notes that Avon essentially came out of nowhere to run the drug trade in west Baltimore, when the Major Crimes Unit hits a wall attempting to gather information on him.
Gang Lord: At the start of the series, Avon, along with his right-hand man Stringer Bell, are the most powerful gangsters within the city, the Barksdale organization being the largest drug operation, ensuring the leaders never personally handle drugs and utilising an elaborate system of communication, having complete control of all the best territory on the Westside, holding the prized Franklin Terrace Towers high-rise housing project and the nearby low rise housing projects called "the Pit", both of which they have turned into 24-hour drug markets, as well as multiple corners throughout the West, laundering their money through buying up worthless property through shell companies, with them commanding absolute fear and respect from the populace whilst staying off the police's radar. Things go downhill from here.
Genius Bruiser: A former golden﻿ gloves boxer who is quite Street Smart, he can come up with clever plans such as his framing of the corrupt prison guard, and has moments of reflection. He also took over the drug trade in Baltimore and ran it very successfully for years which definitely requires some smarts.
Graceful Loser: He takes defeat pretty well each time it's dealt to him.
He surrenders peacefully when he's arrested. He even has Stringer open the safe for the cops, if only so that it wouldn't be ruined when the cops force it open.
Avon: You only do two days. The day you get in. And the day you get out.
Hidden Depths: Despite Stringer presenting himself as the intelligent and sophisticated one, Avon is much more astute than his Blood Knight ways would indicate, seeing right through the red tape bullshit of Stringer's "legitimate" business ventures, where Stringer himself is unable to.
Just a Gangster: The trope namer. He doesn't hide his contempt for the "businessman-like" strategy, he's completely uninterested in going legit and even resists efforts by Stringer to turn the Barksdale Organization to only wholesaling drugs because all Avon's ever known in his life is the vicious game of hustling on the corners and claiming territory by killing or frightening off the competition. He turns out to be right - the other dealers won't chip in unless the boss proves he can out-violence everyone else, and when a second challenger emerges in Marlo, Stringer's approach fails.
Kingpin in His Gym: In one scene in the first season, he, Stringer, Wee-Bey, and Stinkum are seen playing basketball in a gym.
Know When to Fold 'Em: Both times he gets arrested.
In Season 1, he just waits in the nightclub for the police to come in and has Stringer open the safe so that the police don't ruin it to get it open.
In Season 3, once the police are gathered at the armory, Avon recognizes he will be sent back to prison and orders his many soldiers to open up and not to fight back, even though they are very heavily armed.
Large and in Charge: The King of his organization, and one of the tallest members at 6'2".
Mentor: He tries to take this role to D'Angelo and make him a worthy successor throughout Season 1.
The thing is, you only got to fuck up once. Be a little slow, be a little late, just once...
A Lighter Shade of Black: Compared to Marlo. Avon is a brutal drug kingpin but he is not above reason, has principles he sticks to diligently, is capable of restraint and mercy, cares deeply for those close to him, is sincerely likable and good to those who work under him, has moments of genuine kindness and is focused on making money rather than evil for it's own sake. By contrast, Marlo is completely beyond any restraint or compassion, has no limits to what he will do to achieve what he wants, is obsessed with being feared and his status even more than making money, has almost no close relationships other than Chris and has a complete disinterest in human life, often having people killed for petty slights or just for his own sadism.
Might as Well Not Be in Prison at All: He's sent away to prison in season 2, but manages to maintain control of his business, take over the supply of drugs flowing into the prison, and spend his free time playing video games and eating KFC. It's not clear if he still has these same privileges after going back to prison at the end of season 3, but it seems likely, and he still influences the street game in Season 5 via prison visits.
Minored in Ass-Kicking: Boxed Golden Gloves when he was younger. He wasn't good enough to keep fighting long-term, but it seems to have laid a strong foundation for the violence he presides over as an adult.
Morality Chain: Avon's unnamed brother who is in a vegetative state seems to inform a lot of his kinder instincts, as he is aware of the human toll of the game and how dangerous it is. It separates him from someone like Marlo. It is a major reason why Avon allows Cutty out of the game and gives him money to start a boxing gym.
Minored in Ass-Kicking: Boxed when he was younger. He wasn't quite good enough to keep fighting long-term, but it seems to have laid a strong foundation for the violence he presides over as an adult.
Idiot Ball: Brianna calls him out for sending D'Angelo in a drug run without proper backup or decoys, when Avon feels that he couldn't trust anybody else.
The Informant: He is adamantly against it as an old school gangster, but the trope comes into play with him a few times.
Avon is suspected of being this by his drug connection in New York because of the low sentence he got, which is what causes the organization to be dropped by their connect, Roberto. The ironic truth is that the investigation was effectively rushed from the top and the Baltimore Police ended up putting together a weaker case than they could have.
The part he plays as part of his Batman Gambit where he orchestrates the hotshots at the prison and then rats out the officer that snuck in the drugs (who are also harassing Wee-Bey).
The one time Avon truly rats someone out is to Brother Mouzone, who was threatening his reputation with other gangsters in New York.
I Need a Freaking Drink: His reaction to nearly getting killed by Omar is to get absolutely sloshed with Stringer and Wee-Bey.
Negated Moment of Awesome: Just as he's tooling up an army with enough ordnance to blow Marlo to kingdom come, the police show up knocking at the door and arrest him with most of his soldiers.
Neighbourhood-Friendly Gangsters: He sponsors a local charity basketball game, and in season 3 he gives Cutty the financial backing to get his boxing gym up and running, among other community activities.
Never Going Back to Prison: Avon never wanted to go to prison at all, and until the end of Season 1 he'd managed to become a drug kingpin without ever seeing the inside of jail. Despite the power and perks he has inside prison he's awfully happy to be out of it in season 3 and vows to never go back.
Pet the Dog: His interactions with his family in Seasons One and Two, his interactions with Wee-Bey in Season Two, and his interactions with Cutty in Season Three all show he is capable of a lot of kindness despite being a ruthless gangster.
Politically Incorrect Villain: He doubles the bounty on Omar when he finds out he's gay, which is to be expected of street-level drug dealers in Baltimore, especially in the 2000s.
Properly Paranoid: Has unprecedented, advanced communications systems and protocols in place to begin with, and changes them some more the moment he perceives a nebulous threat from the police. That's in addition to having stayed off the grid with almost no paper trail with police unable to even find a photo of him, even going so far as to meddle with the official records of the projects to replace his image with that of a middle-aged white man, just in case.
Red Oni: To Stringer's Blue Oni. While Stringer is aloof, intellectual, and makes decisions based on coldblooded logic, Avon, while being extremely clever and well versed in criminal ways, is more emotional, violent and rash.
Returning Big Bad: He was the Big Bad of Season 1, and returns as part of the Big Bad Duumvirate with Stringer in Season 3 once he gets out of jail.
The Spook: While those on the street know him, Avon has done a very good job of staying off the police radar and has almost no paper trail, to the point that the police can't even find a photo of him. It's only because Lester has connections in the boxing community that they manage to find a photo of him, off of a poster for an event he fought in.
Street Smart: He is a very far cry from being sophisticated in the same manner as Stringer, but he is intelligent and streetwise, able to understand the importance of key things that Stringer misses, such as the Sunday Truce and knowing they are getting ripped off by the bigwigs of the town in trying to go legit.
Surrounded by Idiots: In Season 3 he's unable to recruit any quality muscle for a while — with Slim Charles being a notable exception — and is burdened with a bunch of morons at first, until he hires some soldiers from the Eastside. A more subtle and rare case when he calls out Stringer in season 2 over his questioning of Brother Mouzone, as soldiers like that take care of their own business.
Sympathetic P.O.V.: He would be a run-of-the mill big-bad guy in most other works. The Wire takes some time to show how his life circumstances influence his criminal ways, how his rivals are worse than him, as well as his positive traits.
Thicker Than Water: Has a soft spot for his nephew D'Angelo and discusses that family is what counts and ultimately the point of the game.
Villain Decay: Starts the series at the height of his power and flying under everyone's radars until McNulty takes issue against him. The police, internal dissent and other street rivals bring him down gradually and his kingdom eventually ceases to exist in the last two seasons. Avon finally settles into a humbler prisoner contact-broker role in Season 5, which while not a Retired Monster, is a far cry from the King of the Westside that he was in Season 1.
Villain on Leave: Avon after being the Big Bad of Season 1, spends all of Season 2 and the beginning of Season 3 in prison. While still present in the narrative with his own storyline, Season 2 has The Greek as the Big Bad. Once he is released though, Avon quickly becomes the main villain again, though this time he shares more of the spotlight and control of the organization with Stringer.
Villainous BSoD: Spends the entire season 3 finale in an extended one, after Stringer's death. He loses all interest and fire he had in his drug war with Marlo, his corners and perhaps even the game itself. He perfunctorily goes through the motions of the bare minimum of leadership and can only laugh at the end of his criminal career when the police bust him and his whole gang.
Villainous Friendship: Stringer and Avon go way back and are like brothers. He's more than a boss to Wee-Bey, they are close and get closer when he's incarcerated.
Worthy Opponent:
By the end of the first Season, he and Stringer come to view McNulty as this.
Comes to view Marlo Stanfield as one after being repeatedly surprised by Marlo's cunning and ruthlessness.