Blue Oni: To Johnny Weeks', and later Sherrod's, Red Oni. It keeps him alive while both of them end up dead.
Break the Cutie: After failing to clean himself up, he's targeted by a street addict who robs and beats him constantly. The police fail to help him out of the mess, so he takes matters into his own hands and plans to use potassium cyanide to kill the man, but Sherrod, another addict who's like a son to Bubbles, falls for the trap instead, mistaking the cyanide for heroine. Bubbles turns himself in for murder, and tries to hang himself with a belt in the interrogation room.
Butt-Monkey: Played for drama.
Classical Anti-Hero: Bubbs has a lot of good qualities, (cleverness, ingenuity, an entrepreneurial personality, business savvy, a basically good heart, etc.) but he's certainly not many people's idea of a hero, nor is he looking to become one.
Disappeared Dad: He has a son named Keyshawn whose mother who has taken him to New Jersey away from Bubbles, which he says would be better for everyone. His paternal instincts instead are used to keep his fellow addicts out of trouble.
The Dog Bites Back:
Herc let Bubbles down multiple times to help out against The Fiend. Bubbles eventually tires of what feels like sweet nothings from Herc. So Bubbles strolls by a church, and notices the congregation and a surely respected Black minister making their way to the cars. He has a "Eureka!" Moment, and calls in the minister to Herc as doing a drug re-up. Herc takes the bait, hook line and sinker, and roughs up the minister during what turns out to be a bogus shakedown. Herc had already gotten himself in hot water over a very similar situation when he subjected a woman to a search just because Marlo deliberately engaged with her. This latest incident only compounds his already considerable troubles, and ultimately contributes to getting fired from the BPD.
Averted with the attempt to poison The Fiend with the hot shot. That obviously didn't turn out so well.
Earn Your Happy Ending: Over the course of the series he endures as much hardship as any other character, and he's one of only a few "street" characters who doesn't die, go to prison, or appear to be headed for one of those two fates in the end. His evolution from a vagrant heroin addict to a sober, well-adjusted individual is one of the few stories of redemption in this otherwise brutal, pitch-black universe. His monologue where he finally comes to terms with Sherrod's death is certainly one of the most emotional and compelling scenes in the entire show.
Functional Addict: Despite his heroin addiction, he manages to be a useful informant and a valuable mentor to Johnny and Sherrod.
Guile Hero: He manages to inform on various drug dealers for the better part of five seasons without ever being suspected of being a snitch, mostly because he's very clever in his information-gathering. Deconstructed because whilst he is clever enough, he is a Non-Action Guy who is completely defenseless against the junkie fiend who keeps robbing him and beating him up.
The Informant: Partially earns his living working as one for the BPD.
Interrupted Suicide: After Sherrod's death.
The Mentor: Does his best to school his green protégés. It's fairly clear that Bubs genuinely enjoys teaching and trying to help the young men under his care, first by being a Big Brother Mentor to Johnny and later taking an almost fatherly interest in Sherrod.
Mobile Kiosk: Starts telling t-shirts and other items from a shopping cart to support himself in season 3. He's pretty good at it, at least until he attracts the attention of The Fiend.
My God, What Have I Done?: After Sherrod takes the "hot shot" Bubbles had prepared for his tormentor and dies.
Non-Action Guy: He has no combat skills against the more aggressive drug fiends.
Only Known by Their Nickname:
Until late in Season 5, his real name is revealed only through incidental references to legal documents and the like; he's almost always called "Bubbles" or "Bubbs" in conversation.
Walon, despite having been Bubbles' sponsor for over a year only finds out his first name because Fletch says it in front of him.
The Punishment Is the Crime: The reason Landsman drops his prosecution. Bubbles has to live with the guilt over Sherrod's death, but eventually he overcomes the grief and is able to move on.
Shopping Cart of Homelessness: Bubs is often seen pushing a shopping cart with his few possessions around, or items that he's gathered from one of his scams. In seasons 3 and 4 at various times he ran a veritable mini-store out of the cart, using it as a means of moving and organizing merchandise.
Street Smart: It's hinted that he's been navigating the streets for decades, the fact that he's still alive is because he's extremely savvy about living in the streets.
Survivor's Guilt: He feels so guilty over Sherrod's accidental death that he tries and fails to hang himself, then has to process the guilt when he goes clean and works to put his life back together. When he learns that he is HIV-negative despite having been a dope fiend most of his life, he says it's unfair because Sherrod did catch it.
Those Two Guys: With Johnny Weeks.
Trauma Conga Line: Until his happy ending.
Tropaholics Anonymous: Bubbles drifts in and out of various recovery programs and addiction support groups until he finally sobers up for good in season 5.