Antagonist in Mourning: When he's called to see the scene where Omar was killed, he's obviously shocked and disturbed, despite some of his less than friendly interactions with Omar.
Blue Oni: To McNulty's Red Oni, being much more coolheaded compared to him.
Boring, but Practical: Bunk's style of detective work is a lot less daring and flashy than McNulty's and he makes a point of staying within the guidelines and avoiding stepping on the toes of those above and around him as much as he can but he consistently gets results and avoids the messes Jimmy can't help causing because he wants to play cowboy.
Can't Hold His Liquor: Namecheked. He has some relative control, but Bunk vomits once in front of Daniels and several characters mention offscreen instances.
The Casanova: Not to the degree of McNulty, but he's cheated on his wife an exorbitant number of times.
Catchphrase: You happy now, bitch?
Cigar Chomper: A cool, classy cigar aficionado.
Clothing Reflects Personality: The man "was born in pinstripes", wearing a suit nearly every time, Bunk separates himself from many of his colleagues by selecting items such as French cuff shirts, tie clips, and a fedora hat. He also has a tendency to mix patterns in his shirts and ties, and generally does so well. His attire demonstrates both authority and swagger, two personality traits he possesses in droves.
Bunk: The Bunk is strictly a suit-and-tie motherfucker.
Consummate Professional: Compared to McNulty anyway, as Bunk reminds him.
I'm a murder police. I work murders. I don't fuck with no make-believe. I don't jerk shit around. I catch a murder, and I work it.
Deadpan Snarker: His defining trait. In a world of snark, Bunk reigns supreme with his many withering lines, usually directed at Jimmy after he's done something deeply stupid.
Death Glare: Prominent in Season 5, the non verbal part of his What the Hell, Hero? rebukes to McNulty.
Dressing Down: The one time he is in casual wear —in Season 2, when he is briefly working outside Homicide— it is to make a point about MCU not being his natural habitat.
The Fashionista: Noted for his lawyerly affection for pinstripe suits, and identifies the designer of Spiros' blazer from the buttons.
Gay Bravado: Time for you to show the Bunk some love...
Bunk: You're my real partner, Lester. My life partner.
Lester: Don't tease, bitch.
Bunk: Look at that bow-legged motherfucker. I made him walk like that.
Or how about:
McNulty: You know why I respect you so much, Bunk? ... It's because when it came time for you to fuck me, you were very gentle.
Bunk: You damn right.
McNulty: Because you see, you could have just hauled me out to the garage and bent me over the hood of a radio car... but no, you were very gentle.
Bunk: Well yeah. I knew it was your first time. I wanted to make that shit special.
Guest-Star Party Member: He mostly works independently of Major Crimes on his own cases, but in Season 2, Bunk (along with Beadie) works more directly with them when they investigate the dead girls in the docks and who the perpetrators are. He even joins their raid on the brothel and surveillance on Vondas.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: Possibly only true friend our hero Jimmy McNulty can ever have in this world. As much as McNulty alienates everyone else, and as pissed as Bunk gets at him especially in Season 5, there's never any real danger of Bunk betraying him or casting him aside.
Mr. Vice Guy: Women, booze and profanity. His first two vices are less prominent when compared to those of Jimmy, who has them by the metric ton.
One-Liner Echo: "Giving a fuck when ain't your turn to give a fuck", originally coined by McNulty.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Moreland is just called "Bunk" most of the time. His first name, William, is hardly used.
"The Reason You Suck" Speech: Gives an armor-piercing one to Omar and many to McNulty. Here's a representative example of the latter:
You've lost your fucking mind, Jimmy. Look at you. Half-lit every third night, dead drunk every second. Nut deep in random pussy. What little time you are sober and limp-dicked, you're working murders that don't even exist!
Secret-Keeper: He is the first person to be aware of the serial killer's identity and keeps it secret, despite objecting very strongly.
Signature Headgear: A fedora hat, showcasing his class and differentiating him from the average misfit of the MCU.
Snark-to-Snark Combat: Smoothly fires back at any remark sent his way.
Jimmy: You know what they call a guy who pays that much attention to his clothes, don't you?
Bunk: Mm-hmm, a grown-up.
Spell My Name with a "The": When he's speaking in third person at least. Many characters don't include the "The" when they refer to him.
Super Drowning Skills: "The Bunk can't swim, and ain't too good at floating either." When he has to do surveillance from the sea, he puts on a lifesaver that looks like armor, very early, before setting foot on the boat and is very nervous aboard. He relaxes quite a lot later.
Third-Person Person: "The Bunk."
This Is for Emphasis, Bitch!: His catchphrase.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With McNulty.