Ambiguously Evil: The main question about Daniels in Season 1 is if he is a good cop. Early on, he coaches Prez on how to talk to internal affairs and lie about why he blinded a child, but shows a lot of shame in doing so. Fitz casually tells McNulty that Daniels had been investigated for corruption, but McNulty comes to respect and vouch for him either way. The series makes it pretty clear that Daniels is a morally good man who is trying to be an Internal Reformist. It also never goes into detail about the nature of his corruption.
Badass Pacifist: He has a brains over brawns style and approach to crime-fighting. Behold his peaceful arrest of Avon inside the Barksdale compound, taking over a SWAT operation. He also has the stones to hold his own against Burrell and Clay Davis in a dignified manner.
Bald of Authority: Begins to sport a shaved head in season 3, which makes him look even more commanding.
Being Good Sucks: In the end, Cedric correctly identifies that the mayorally mandated fixing of the crime stats are one of the largest structural problems for the police as an institution, and one of the main obstacles for any kind of meaningful reform, and when he becomes Commissioner he staunchly refuses to have any part in it. Unfortunately, this refusal to play ball results in City Hall pressuring him into resigning.
Benevolent Boss: Cedric Daniels is a pretty supportive boss, even Jimmy calls him, "better than most".
Big Good: While Daniels starts the series as the head of Major Crimes and is shown as a good leader and decent man, he isn't high enough in rank to change things. Then, he is more or less chosen by Carcetti to become this, as the new mayor figures out that Daniels is the only high ranking policeman left who seems to have any integrity. Unfortunately, Carcetti becomes corrupted by the politics game and the recently promoted Daniels is threatened by Steindorf and Campbell into complying with cooking the stats again. Instead of becoming corrupted himself, Daniels quits.
Catchphrase: Downplayed with "This is (some) bullshit."
The Chains of Commanding: Daniels is always struggling between the politics of the higher-ups, his own judgement, the pressure and Cowboy Cop antics from some of his more uncontrollable but competent detectives and the need to protect his more inept underlings.
Character Development: He begins the series as a company man observant of the chain of command but grows tired of the chronic obstructionism and he gradually becomes a reformist, it's not about him, but about the job.
Chekhov's Gun: His law degree. This is Truth in Television, as one of the detectives David Simon shadowed when writing Homicide, Terry McLarneynote , was a law school graduate. Another gun of a much higher caliber is the corruption investigation in his past.
Da Chief: Warns early on that he doesn't want "cowboy shit" and tries to reign McNulty in most of the time during the first season. He becomes a justified case in mid-season 3 when Jimmy and Kima abuse his confidence, force his hand and derail his investigation with their extracurricular activities, but is still willing to have McNulty in his unit after telling him that he's done.
Deadpan Snarker: From time to time.
So one thieving politician trumps 22 murders. Good to know.
Death Glare: He often gives to people who he feels have stepped over the line to just let them know that he is going to give them a serious dressing-down in private later. And he is scarily good at them.
Defector from Decadence: Daniels quits the force after being told to cheat on the crime stats.
Dirty Cop: It's implied that his work in the Western District had him skim money during drug raids, which is the source of his mysterious wealth for a cop of his paygrade. If he was this in the past, he isn't at the start of the series, since he does not show any signs of using his rank or power for personal gain.
A Father to His Men: Tries to protect his subordinates after their numerous displays of incompetence or disloyalty, even when this reflects bad on him.
Good Is Not Soft: He can be quite reasonable and accommodating, but when something angers him, he'll be very vocal about it.
Guile Hero: After being burned a few times, he becomes relatively adept at playing office politics indirectly and/or without openly antagonizing other powerful officials. It's how he earns Carcetti's favor.
Honor Before Reason: He never snitches on dirty officers or superiors, even if its the right thing or smart thing to do.
Internal Reformist: Tries to transform the "stats game" into real police work.
Large and in Charge: Usually the tallest police officer in any room unless the 6'3" Rawls is present.
The Last DJ: To Burrell's infinite chagrin.
Married to the Job: Cedric literally tells his wife Marla that he loves the job, which eventually leads to the end of their marriage.
The Mentor: He's not merely a commanding officer, he likes to give advice to his subordinates whenever he can. It takes awhile, but Carver eventually heeds his advice and it, along with what Carver learns from Colvin, makes Carver a better policeman.
The Missus and the Ex: A male example. He expects McNulty to not be very happy about his dating of Rhonda, but the two men have a friendly chat over it and everything goes fine and dandy.
Morton's Fork: He used this logic as foundation for two of his most memorable quotes.
He is told by Ronnie Perlman that "You can't lose if you don't play". He responds with "You can't win if you don't play either".
He is told by his wife Marla in the final episode to play ball with the crooked politicians.
Marla: "The tree that doesn't bend break, Cedric."
Cedric: "Bend too far and you're already broken".
Mr. Fanservice: He is in excellent shape and occasionally gets shirtless scenes to show it off. He also gets a sex scene with Rhonda at the end of Season 3 that prominently shows his body.
My Master, Right or Wrong: Daniels is a good officer loyal to the bond that police have with each other, regardless if his fellows or superiors being "pieces of shit" (his words). Because of this he has done reprehensible things like cover up Prez blinding a kid. Though he would never snitch on other cops, the mere belief that he could do it has convinced people like Senator Clay Davis or Commissioner Burrell to undo the damage of their corruption.
Nerves of Steel: He has the stones to hold his ground against Senator Davis and Deputy Burrell and stand tall while he's a mere Lieutenant.
Nice Guy: He loses his temper many times with some of less competent underlings but he's A Father to His Men who is way more accommodating and reasonable than most of the other police commanders, has a solid conscience and is Amicable Exes with Marla Daniels.
Noodle Incident: The precise nature of the corruption allegation he faced earlier in his career is never revealed, though it is implied to have been something along the lines of skimming drug money.
Not So Above It All: At work, he cracks fewer jokes than the rest of the team. At home, he's one of the few guys who can skewer Lester. And even he joins in on the asskicking when Bird refers to Kima as a cunt, which shows how much Bird has it coming. More so, Daniels later tells Bunk to send Bird his love when the trial approaches.
Official Couple: With lawyer Rhonda Pearlman in season 3.
Passed-Over Promotion: Burrell implies that Daniels will get the command of the next available district. The promise is nullified after their fallout over the Barksdale detail and the post goes to a more manageable officer. Burrell ultimately later fills the promise at the end of season 3 after forcing Bunny Colvin out of the Western District over the Hamsterdam fracas.
Perpetual Frowner: His typical expression borders on Death Glare territory.
Rank Up: A rising star under Carcetti's New Day. He's too good to last. He's proud to be promoting Carver face to face in one of his last acts as policeman.
Reasonable Authority Figure: Eventually revealed to be one. He's gruff and not someone to take major fuck-ups lightly but he is generally good to those he works with and will listen to those under him.
Reassigned to Antarctica: After the first Barksdale detail is wrapped up, Burrell sends him to the basement to handle evidence control.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!:
Subverted in Season 2; he grows tired of all the bullshit inherent in the BPD, sends in his resignation papers and is days away from leaving the force, but he changes his mind after the Major Crimes Unit and actual police work become plausible.
Played straight in Season 5 when he's put between a rock and a hard place.
Secret-Keeper: Daniels will keep secrets to save loyal subordinates and loved ones. In the end he is given a choice to either juke the stats or address his allegedly corrupt past that he is being blackmailed with. He could have fought but he quits the force instead because it's implied his ex-wife was involved.
Shirtless Scene: Several during his private life. The man is really ripped.
Silent Treatment: He tends to show his disapproval by going deadly quiet. Often.
Sophisticated as Hell: He almost always keeps a polite and formal tone but has no issue using as much profanity as anyone else.
The Stoic: Tends to keep his emotions in check which makes the few times he does lose it either hilarious or absolutely terrifying.
Token Good Teammate: He's one of the few people above the detectives and officers in command who actually gives a shit about doing good and helping the city rather than his own career advancement. Given the setting he's in, this does him little good.
Tranquil Fury: One of his specialties and very good at this. Detectives that wouldn't think twice about throwing down with hardened gangbangers are scared shitless when Daniels' voice drops another octave in restrained fury.