Affably Evil: Chris isn't particularly outgoing or charming, but he's always quite polite and pleasant even when committing a murder, always making an effort to comfort his victims and ease them through the process. Ironically for someone who's killed as much as he has, Chris is probably the most reluctant to commit violence of the higher-ups in Marlo's crew, and takes little pleasure in his work. When Marlo decides to have Bodie and later Michael killed, Chris is the only one to speak against it, albeit only briefly.
Victim: Chris, please!
Chris: Don't fret, boss, I got you covered. Quick and clean, I promise.
Antagonist in Mourning: He does not look happy upon learning that Omar was shot and killed by some random kid.
Bantering Baddie Buddies: Has this dynamic with Snoop. They're always seen together when on the job, and while their banter is generally minimal, the two occasionally bicker about how they their executions should be carried out.
Berserk Button: He does not like child molesters, as evidenced by his flipping out and beating Michael's stepfather to death. Word of God confirms it was because he was molested as a child himself.
Boom, Headshot!: His preferred move, quick and somewhat clean. He also trains his soldiers to shoot either for the head or the groin in order to counter a Bulletproof Vest.
Consummate Professional: As implied above, Chris prefers to do his killing "quick and clean", ideally with the body disposed of or hidden afterwards. Aside from Devar, he never seems to derive any pleasure from murder, seeing it as just a dirty but essential part of the game, and thus one you do well or don't do at all.
Contrasting Sequel Antagonist: To both Stringer and Wee-Bey.
To Stringer, as The Dragon to his drug lord boss. Stringer is a charismatic business minded underboss while Chris is a cold enforcer and soldier at heart. Additionally, instead of being The Starscream, Chris is The Creon being perfectly happy acting as a gangster under Marlo, with no higher business aspirations.
To Wee-Bey, as the top enforcer and muscle of the organization, with a mountain of victims serving that organization. While Wee-Bey has a friendly and boisterous personality, Chris is cold and unemotional. Both also show a lot of unexpected humanity in Season 4 regarding their relationship with one of the boys, Namond for Bey and Michael for Chris. Wee-Bey gradually pushes his son out of the drug game and into a normal life once it became clear to Bey and Colvin that his son really wasn't hard enough for the streets. Conversely, Chris drags Michael into the drug trade and turns him into a killer but does so while also saving him and his brother from an abusive home.
The Creon: Marlo's number two with a unique voice, but unlike what Stringer Bell was for Avon Barksdale, Chris displays Undying Loyalty to Marlo, always giving him honest advice and executing his orders, however ruthless, to the letter and displaying no agenda or ambition whatsoever.
Dark and Troubled Past: Though it's never shown in-series, according to Word of God, Chris was a victim of child molestation.
The Dragon: Marlo Stanfield's top enforcer, adviser and clear Number Two.
Dragon-in-Chief: Downplayed. Chris is much more active than Marlo, who prefers the role of a Non-Action Big Bad. Several instances indicate that Chris is the real power of the gang, as Marlo rarely makes a decision without consulting him first and often seems to be seeking a nod of approval or confirmation from Chris rather than his counsel. Despite this, Chris is fiercely loyal to Marlo and always allows him the final word.
The Dreaded: Just the sight of Chris makes Lex realize he should Prepare to Die. The boys also speculate that Chris might be a "Zombie Master" due to the growing list of people who vanish without a trace in his wake.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: He's the single most prolific assassin in the entire show, but he's warm and affectionate to his girlfriend and kids and even takes time out in the middle of a gang war to visit them. Toward the end of Season 5, he laments to Snoop that he can't visit his family for fear that they'll be targeted the way he and Snoop went after Butchie to hurt Omar.
Even Evil Has Standards: There's no one he won't kill under Marlo's orders, but child molesters absolutely disgust him.
Evil Mentor: With Snoop, teaches Michael and the other "pups" the ways of the game.
Family-Values Villain:
He takes good care of his family, even after he is arrested and sent away to prison for life.
Other than the murder of Michael's step-father the only time Chris loses his cool is when he's forced to stay away from his family for an extended period of time due to the war with Omar. We get a short scene where we see him pacing, repeatedly throwing a knife into the floor, and angrily snapping at Snoop. All of this is quite out of character for him.
From Camouflage to Criminal: Heavily implied, based on how he carries himself in combat, his tactical skill, and his overall trigger discipline, though it's never confirmed outright.
Morality Pet:
Michael at first seems to be this to him, with Chris going out of his way to help him, and continues to have positive feelings towards him even when Snoop sours on him. It's ultimately subverted when Marlo orders him killed on suspicion of him being a snitch and Chris only briefly voices disagreement, instead of making any real effort to defend the boy.
His actual family is this, played straight. Chris ends up going into hiding during Marlo's war with Omar to keep them safe and becomes extremely angry when he fails to kill Omar since it would mean he can't go back to his family.
Neighborhood-Friendly Gangsters: He's too feared around the community for this to be in effect for him, but he did try to invoke this at one point for Marlo's benefit. Early in Season 4 Marlo's enforcers and dealers approach children before the first day of school, giving them money for clothes and books. We then cut to Marlo and Chris watching the scene, where Marlo looks unhappy at just giving away money while Chris tries to convince Marlo that it'll "make his name ring out".
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: The one unabashed good thing he does (Killing Michael's pedophile stepfather) is what finally gets him caught. Instead of his usual, relatively clean kills, Chris is so disgusted that he beats the stepfather to death in an alley before he and Snoop even get to the kill site, which creates all sorts of DNA evidence for Bunk to find.
Only Friend: Seemingly the only person Marlo has any genuine bond with.
OOC Is Serious Business: All of his kills are quick, clean and unemotional except for Devar, Michael's pedophile stepfather, who he beats to death in a rage. Snoop is caught off guard by it and looks shocked the entire time.
Pay Evil unto Evil: When he finds out that Michael's stepfather is a pedophile, Chris beats the man to death with only his fists and the butt of his gun right in the middle of the street.
Parental Substitute: Becomes a father figure to Michael, as he sympathizes greatly with his history as a victim of abuse to the point of brutally murdering the man responsible. He's also incredibly hesitant to believe that Michael was a snitch (he wasn't) but ultimately can't stop the rest of the gang from hunting his protege down.
Pop-Cultured Badass: The ruthlessly efficient killer just to happens to love Baltimore club music and is an aficionado of the local music scene. Chris weaponizes this to identify New York dealers when they are unable to name Baltimore tunes that he asks about.
Pet the Dog: Takes a few minutes in the middle of a brutal gang war with Omar and his associates to visit his girlfriend and his kids, to whom he is warm and affectionate.
Professional Killer: Definitely not his only role in the organization, but when it comes to eliminating problems, rivals, and potential leaks, Chris is the man dispatched to handle it.
Rape Is a Special Kind of Evil: Chris believes in this. He's the most prolific killer on the show who engages in many cold and brutal actions (most notably torturing a blind old man to death), but nevertheless, he considers Michael's stepfather to be a disgusting piece of human waste for molesting children and participating in Prison Rape. Chris goes so far as to break his own protocols for how to efficiently and cleanly kill targets, instead beating Devar’s face in while so enraged that he seems to be simultaneously snarling and struggling to hold back tears as he does it.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The calm, focused, and unemotional Blue to Snoop's hot tempered, Blood Knight Red.
Scary Black Man: Not the only one, but as the most prolific killer in the entire series he deserves special mention. Because he doesn't look like the stereotypical scary black man, he is occasionally able to interact with normal society without anyone being any wiser, most notably the time when he goes into the courthouse and asks Rhonda Pearlman, Rupert Bond, and Cedric Daniels for directions on where to go without them ever realizing who he is.
Donut: Chris, he different. You can tell by them coon-ass country clothes that nigga be wearing.
Spiteful Spit: To Michael's stepfather. It comes back later as a Chekhov's smoking gun.
Undying Loyalty: The vicious and paranoid Marlo trusts him completely, and when Chris is rounded up by the police Marlo says that Chris will never talk as long as Marlo takes cares of Chris' family.
Verbal Tic: Addressing victims as "boss" to help put them at ease with their impending deaths.
Villainous Friendship:
It's clear that he and Marlo go way back.
In the montage at the end of Season 5, he is shown to have become friends with Wee-bey in prison.
Villain Respect: He commends Blind Butchie's refusal to give up Omar before putting him out of his misery.
You a tough old man. (Boom, Headshot!)
Worthy Opponent: He is consistently and professionally wary of Omar, who reciprocates in kind. Both are aware that they are up against elite opponents and are acutely aware of the mortal danger they pose to each other.
Would Harm a Senior: He and Snoop first torture Blind Butchie to try and get Omar's location out of him, then kill him when he stays silent, reasoning that Omar will hear of his mentor's murder and come out of hiding for revenge. Snoop seemingly does most of the damage, but Chris is the one who fires the killing shot.