Affably Evil: A corrupt mayor who's also quite personable and a Graceful Loser. He even tries to give Hamsterdam a shot, but is forced to backpedal to avoid being crushed in the election.
Arc Villain: For the first half of Season 4 for Carcetti's plotline. He and Carcetti are running in a primary against each other (and Tony Gray) and Royce is shown to be the most immoral of the candidates and uses the dirtiest tactics.
Badass Boast: What he says regarding Carcetti challenging him.
He wants to go big dick with me? I'll give him one he can't handle!
Cultural Posturing: During the Democratic primary campaign against the white Carcetti his staff prints up posters using African colors in an effort to appeal to racial solidarity.
David vs. Goliath: A two-term incumbent black mayor with massive resources and support from the political machine. He loses against a white newcomer.
Graceful Loser: After losing the primaries, Royce invites Carcetti to the office, has a friendly chat with him and makes him try the mayoral chair.
Interrupted Intimacy: Herc catches him getting a blowjob from his secretary. In response, Royce buys Herc's silence with a promotion to Sergeant.
Let the Bully Win: Regularly organizes poker games with rich big shots who lose deliberately in order to fill the mayor's pockets. They accept it as part of the game, but are not happy about how much they have to lose in order to appease him.
A Lighter Shade of Black: Though he takes an antagonistic role in Season 4 and is pretty dirty, Royce is still capable of more kindness and altruism than both Clay Davis and Nerese Campbell, both of whom are shown as utterly self interested. Royce is also never seen directly making deals with drug lords unlike them as well.
Mayor Pain: Subverted; at first he's presented as too venal and incompetent to do anything about Baltimore's problems but Carcetti's arc reveals that it's the system rather than the person at the top of it that's most responsible for the city's plight.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: An example in which he's for once on the wrong end is when he loses the primaries as the direct consequence of allowing the highly successful Hamsterdam experiment to continue.
Pet the Dog:
One of the very few times during his stint as mayor when he isn't being a blatantly corrupt and self-serving politician is when he tries to make Hamsterdam work. When Royce sees the difference it makes in the crime rate, he's frantic to find some way to make use of it without admitting that it's essentially drug legalization, and he does so despite warnings from advisors that it will get him and the city in trouble with the federal government.
After a ridiculously dirty and ugly campaign race against Carcetti, as soon as Royce loses he's nothing but gracious and welcoming to Carcetti.
Slave to PR: His reaction to Hamsterdam comes off as self-serving but somewhat redeeming, but once it is exposed on television and becomes a major PR disaster he quickly shuts it down.
Sleazy Politician: Not as bad as Clay Davis, but that's not saying much. By any reasonable standard, Royce is pretty unethical.