Badass Decay: Deconstructed in-universe after quitting the game.
Slim: B, he was a man in his time, you know?
Avon: He a man today, he a man.
Boxing Battler: Although it's downplayed, he has a few scenes where he shows how much damage a guy with his size and physique could do in a fist fight once it's combined with his in-depth boxing knowledge.
Chick Magnet: Many of the women can't get over how handsome he is.
Death Glare: Gives Fruit a devastating one. It's all Fruit can do to not pack his pants.
Earn Your Happy Ending: Manages to navigate through a minefield of temptations and situations that could get him killed or land him back in jail to run a successful boxing academy and find some peace.
Elegant Weapon for a More Civilized Age: He learns revolvers are no longer superior; now sheer firepower is more important than a reliable weapon.
Foil: Dennis' story paralleled that of String. String got conned by politicians and contractors. Dennis was helped by legitimate and good people.
Handsome Lech: For a while. Eventually he grows into more of a Chivalrous Pervert because the women he's sleeping and flirting with are mostly the single mothers of his students, which naturally hurts his reputation with the boys he's trying to teach and puts tension into his relationships with them. Soon after he is called out on it by Michael he settles down with a real girlfriend.
Hates Being Nicknamed: After going straight, he preferred being called Dennis instead of Cutty.
Heel–Face Turn: "The game ain't in me no more".
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: While he may have a brutal and selfish past, some of which lingers in his actions after he is released from prison, Cutty is genuine about helping youths avoid the game through his gym and goes out of his way to steer them clear of trouble.
Mentor: He becomes a boxing coach once he detaches himself from the game.
Mirror Character: Has this dynamic with Pryzbylewski; both of them left the Game from opposite sides and could not be anymore different in terms of background and culture but ultimately, they have to try and educate the next generation in their own ways: Prez in the classroom and Cutty in the gym.
Mistaken for Pedophile: Specifically by Michael. "He just too friendly, you know? That shit creep me out, man, like he some type of faggot or something." This has more to do with Michael than with Cutty. It's very strongly implied that Michael was molested by his stepfather, and since Cutty serves as a father figure to him, Michael doesn't know how to respond to Cutty's kindness.
Mistaken for Subculture: After trying to get Michael off the corner, Dennis is shot in the leg. While in the emergency room, a nurse who looked at his medical records thinks he is an active drug dealer who was shot during criminal activity. Later when she asks Colvin if he's there to arrest Dennis, Colvin set her straight. Dennis is later shown to be dating the nurse.
Parental Substitute: Acts as a father figure to the boys who come to his boxing gym.
Pragmatic Villainy: Objects to Sapper and Gerard beating a guy to death... because then he won't be able to pay them the money he owes. This also becomes one of the many reasons he doesn't fit in with the drug game anymore: before he went to jail the whole thing ran on pragmatic villainy, now everyone is just out to screw each other over without a thought for the long term.
Reformed, but Rejected: Subverted. Initially it looks like his efforts to go straight will be thwarted by bureaucracy and lack of means, but with the aid of the Deacon and Avon he manages to start up a successful boxing gym.
Reformed Criminal: A former compatriot of Avon Barksdale, he is nicknamed "Cutty" for his long spell in the eponymous Baltimore prison. Upon his release, he reservedly tries to get back into "the game", but finds the criminal culture he has returned to is now too brutal to be comfortable with. He eventually resolves to go straight and sets up a boxing gym for boys (though he does have to ask Avon for the cash to do so).
Retired Badass: Dennis stared down a known drug dealer.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: Multiple women become attracted to him largely due to his sincere desire to help the troubled youth of the neighborhood through his gym. It leads to some friction when those women are said youth's single mothers.
Thousand-Yard Stare: Has a particularly unnerving one, and puts it to good use on a few occasions. The man's clearly seen some stuff in his time.
Would Hit a Girl: If that's the only way to get her to talk about her dealer boyfriend who's stealing money from the Barksdales.
You Can't Go Home Again: A large part of his story arc after being released from prison is about this. He's ambivalent about going back into the Game, but can't find much outside of it. His old friends and girlfriend have all moved on, are dead, or destroyed their lives. When he goes back to the Game, he finds he doesn't fit in there, as there's no longer even a semblance of good faith in transactions, and the ranks are staffed either with guys like Bodie (who Cutty can literally remember in diapers) or incompetents. Even when he decides to leave the Game for good, his old girlfriend makes it clear that while she wishes him the best, she's not interested in him anymore. He literally has to start a new life from square one.