Anti-Villain: He's a lieutenant in a criminal empire who is shown to have notable hidden depths, including disliking and regretting the deaths and violence that are part of the drug trade, and he frequently displays intelligence, compassion, and kindness to people around him. It's made clear towards the end of the first season that he's part of the drug trade mostly due to being born into the Barksdale family, which has a long association with it and family members are folded into the drug trade.
All my people, man, my father, my uncles, my cousins, it's just what we do. You just live with this shit until you can't breathe no more. I swear to God, I was courtside for eight months, and I was freer in jail than I ever was at home. ... I want it to go away. I want what Wallace wanted. I want to start over. That's what I want. I don't care where. Anywhere. I just want to go somewhere where I can breathe like regular folk.
Audience Surrogate: We see the criminals' side and learn about the industry primarily through his eyes. He's also much more financially stable than the other dealers, more uncomfortable with the violence, and more interested in normal life, making him easier for an average audience to connect to.
Big Brother Mentor: He plays this role for the boys in the pit, particularly Wallace.
Bald Of Anti-Villainy: Is bald and still a gangster, though not nearly as evil as Avon and Stringer. His hair is noticeably more grown out in Season 2 when he is in prison and wants to distance himself from his criminal family.
Boisterous Weakling: Plays a tough game fronting with the pit boys, but his murder charge is shown to have been the act of a kid who just couldn't take a beating and panicked, and he outright lies about having committed another one. He's ultimately never seen in a fight and not seen as dangerous by his peers.
Character Death: Despite the fact that he seemed set to be the main POV for the criminal characters, D'Angelo outlived his usefulness (at least as far as Stringer was concerned) and was killed on Stringer's orders.
Chess Motifs: In one of the series' most iconic scenes he explains the game to Bodie and Wallace, using parallels in the drug game. Avon Barksdale is like the king, Stringer Bell is like the queen, and dealers are pawns who go out, but also - to their somber realization - go out quick.
Damn, It Feels Good to Be a Gangster!: Very much enjoys the money and prestige his job and his uncle's name give him and is seen spending that money and name enthusiastically more than once. However, as with typical depictions, he discovers the joy has limits.
Decoy Protagonist: Seems like one of the leads in the first season. Then gets killed off in prison around the middle of the second season.
Disappeared Dad: Implied. Neither he or Brianna ever talk about his father, and given that his last name is Barksdale, he likely doesn’t know who he even is.
The Dutiful Son: Always tries to do what the family says, though this becomes harder and harder.
Establishing Character Moment: Is first seen in court getting acquitted of a murder charge, then celebrating in the club before getting reprimanded by his uncle Avon for getting charged in the first place, showing while he's tough, he's nowhere near as on top of things as the upper-level gangsters.
Expository Hairstyle Change: He kept a clean pate during the first season, which came across as mimicking the Bald of Evil of other members of the Barksdale organization such as Bird and Stinkum. He grows his hair out a little more during season 2, which coincides with his disenchantment with Avon and the rest of the family.
The Fashionista: Shardene jokes that he takes more time to get dressed than most women. There are several occasions during the first season where he is seen trying on multiple outfits and trying to get the right look before going out.
Felon's Failson: Downplayed. He has a certain baseline competence in the game, but his heart is not in it, and his acquittal for shooting a guy who beat him up in front of witnesses is what gets Detective Jimmy McNulty talking with Judge Phelan about how the city is failing in their fight against the Barksdale drug organization that leads to the creation of the Major Crimes Unit. D'Angelo's father is never mentioned by name, but his mother Brianna and uncle Avon are key players in the city's drug trade, and his grandfather is a Famed in Story Kingpin Butch Standford.
Fish Out of Water: Shown as an unrefined patron during a dinner with his baby mama in a fancy restaurant. In a broader sense he's out of his element in the criminal world, despite being born into it. The cops/attorneys exploit this when he's under custody. Ultimately not a great fit for the gangster life, but also not totally at place in more civilized circles either.
Guilt-Ridden Accomplice: He carries some guilt over both the killings of Deirdre, where he was just a pawn to distract her while Wee-Bey got into position, and for his uncle and Stringer punishing Gant by having Gant killed after giving testimony against D'Angelo in court. It gets even worse when he learns that Wallace, who he viewed as something like a baby brother, has been killed to make sure he wouldn't talk to the police.
Heel–Face Turn: D'Angelo attempts to make one at the end of Season 1, but because he is unable to get Witness Protection and his mother talking him out of it, he does not flip on his uncle. Despite this, he is shown attempting to leave his drug dealing past behind him in Season 2, and minimizes his time around Avon while in prison.
He Knows Too Much: Stringer believes D'Angelo to be a crumbling liability who will inevitably turn on the rest of the Barksdales to reduce his long prison sentence, so Stringer arranges for his suicide. However, the show also implies that Stringer, in addition to the purely pragmatic reasons, also had some personal motivations for wanting D'Angelo out of the way, chiefly the fact that he was having an affair with D'Angelo's girlfriend Donette, and didn't want him as a romantic rival.
Hidden Depths: He's outright ecstatic at the opportunity to teach Wallace and Bodie chess. In prison, he also shares an insightful analysis of The Great Gatsby which also doubles as introspection over his own lot in life. It all generally serves the point that if not for being born into the Game where he did, he could have made something for himself.
I Just Want to Be Normal: D'Angelo would like nothing more than to leave the Game and simply live an average life without constant fear of death. Unfortunately, that isn't in the cards for him.
Morality Pet: He is fond of all of his hoppers in the Pit (even if Bodie argues with him a lot) but especially has a soft spot for Wallace. Stringer killing him drives D'Angelo over the edge.
Nepotism: It's abundantly apparent to viewers that he only has his job because his uncle wants his nephew to have a good position in the org. He's not particularly brave, intelligent, loyal, or friendly, and might invoke outright dislike in some viewers. However, this is the point.
No-Respect Guy: Not especially respected by the managers of the organization, since he's both the youngest and probably the worst at his job even if he's a good earner.
A Real Man is a Killer: D'Angelo tells everyone that he killed a man as a way of establishing dominance to his crew. He also relates how he killed one of Avon's girlfriends to show he wasn't afraid to kill civilians. Later it is found that the Deirdre thing was Wee-Bey's work and D'Angelo was just an accomplice who didn't know what was going to happen. Avon calls him out on the murder of Blanchard because it got them into trouble since instead of calling for back up or taking the beating D'Angelo shot him on camera like a thin-skinned thug instead of the heir of Barksdale organization.
Reassigned to Antarctica: Is reassigned to a crap detail in the first episode as punishment for getting caught on a murder charge.
Villainous BSoD: Wallace's death, which shakes his belief in the whole system of "family" that he's been taught to rely on.
White Sheep: Downplayed. While he's not exactly an angel, D'Angelo does not share the ruthless, cold-blooded nature of his uncle and his mother, which causes friction among them.
Wrong Genre Savvy: Zig-zagged. In the first season when he's given cryptic orders to accompany Wee-Bey to an isolated place with no one else around and no one to help him, he assumes that he's being set up for a You Have Outlived Your Usefulness moment. He's wrong in that instance, but later proves to be right in his take on the Barksdale leadership.