Authority in Name Only: In Season 2, when he's brought onto the Sobotka investigation. Daniels tells him that even though he's a Sergeant, his rank was not earned (it was given because he was The Mole to Burrell in Season 1), and that Greggs will have authority over him. Eventually in Seasons 4 and 5, he actually earns the respect and authority as he shows more skills in leadership.
Badass Boast: When he procures Marlo's number (courtesy of Herc actually), to an impressed Lester.
Police work, detective, police work.
By-the-Book Cop: He's a very informal cop but Colicchio pushes his luck after a demonstration of excessive force and gets officially reported by Carver, who was initially flexible.
The Chains of Commanding: After he's promoted to sergeant, most notably when he's forced to write up Anthony Colicchio for police brutality in season 5.
Changing of the Guard: He is the implied successor of both Colvin and Daniels.
Character Development: Goes from a hot-headed and inexperienced rookie to a seasoned, streetwise veteran cop over the course of five seasons, and the transformation is entirely believable. His core personality remains intact, but he actually takes lessons that Daniels and Colvin give him to heart and becomes a respected leader among his men.
Dude, Where's My Respect?: Over the course of season 2, Carver begins to tire of doing lowly surveillance jobs after he has been promoted to Sergeant, a rank which Daniels refuses to acknowledge because Carver got it in large part due to acting as The Mole inside the MCU for Burrell back in Season 1. Despite his own frustrations, at first Carver tries to defend Daniels and the assignment to an even more irate Herc, but Carver hits his Rage Breaking Point when he and Herc are staking out Nick Sobotka's house and are not notified that during their stakeout Nick has turned himself in, meaning the two had wasted entire days in a police car in front of Sobotka's house for no reason, and that their own unit had Nick and didn't think to tell them this. At that point Carver declares that he's going to transfer to an open Sergeant's post in Colvin's district, and takes Herc with him.
Fair Cop: Pearlman dismisses him as an inside man on the brothel sting because he doesn't look like he'd have to pay for sex. He takes the compliment.
Heroic BSoD: Has a truly heartbreaking one after what happens to Randy.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Evolves into this in Season 3, and by Season 4 he almost entirely loses the "jerk" part.
Locked Out of the Loop: Has a hilarious moment of this in Season 2, when he and Herc are left watching a townhouse all day looking for a guy that had already turned himself in.
The Mole: In Season 1, he feeds Burrell with inside information of Daniel's detail.
Rank Up: To Sergeant, with the implication that he's promoted because he was Burrell's mole, as Carver scored worse than Herc on the Sergeant's Exam. At the end of the final season he gets promoted to Lieutenant, in one of the few meritorious and truly deserved promotions in the whole show.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He follows Colvin's advice and becomes a reference in the neighbourhood, a policeman close to the citizen and not a perpetual antagonist to the street felon.
Those Two Guys: With Herc.
Took a Level in Badass: He starts out incompetent but develops into a genuinely good cop by the end of the show.
Took a Level in Kindness: Over time Carver goes from another hardass cop who barely acknowledges the community around him to caring about the community he polices and understanding both the community and its criminals as people rather than just targets.