Achilles in His Tent: During season 4 he gives up being a detective and takes a job as a regular patrol cop. He's asked several times by Daniels and his other supervisors to become a detective again, because he's too good an investigator to be in a patrol car but he refuses. Saying he's happier walking the beat. Only when Marlo Stanfield and his gang grow out of control does Mcnulty finally decide to rejoin the Homicide unit to try and stop him.
Actually Pretty Funny: Jimmy usually takes with a smile many of the numerous jabs he receives.
The Alcoholic: It has been observed that he's one of the most realistic portrayals of a high-functioning alcoholic on television. His job is so important to him that he manages to be a Functional Addict outside of his private life. In his private life however, he's a complete wreck. When we see him regularly drinking on the job in season 5, it's a good sign of just how low he's sinking and how many of his own lines he's crossing.
All for Nothing: His serial killer plan finally gets Marlo off the streets (for now) but destroys his career. A montage of Baltimore shows that at large, it hasn't changed for the better.
Alternate Catchphrase Inflection: He tends to say, "What the fuck did I do?" when reprimanded in a way that denies responsibility for whatever they're talking about. Sometimes, however, the ramifications of what he's done get through to him and he says it in a guilty tone.
Antagonist in Mourning: He spends half the show trying to build a case on Stringer, and finally gets him on tape incriminating himself. That very afternoon, Stringer is betrayed to Omar and Brother Mouzone, who ambush and murder him. McNulty is distraught.
McNulty: I caught him, Bunk. On the wire, I caught him. He doesn't fucking know it.
Anti-Hero: He's an alcoholic, womanizing cop in Baltimore who has taken every action possible to try and fight the drug problem in Baltimore. But half the shit he does can be rooted back to his need to demonstrate that he's smarter than anybody else, and he gets a bit too involved and casual when tampering with the vagrants, like a child on a candy store, which doesn't go unnoticed by Bunk, Lester or the FBI.
Lester: McNulty, you are deserving of serious psychological study
Arch-Enemy: He definitely regards Stringer as this and holds a serious grudge against him after he gets off scot free at the end of Season 1, which leads to McNulty becoming obsessed with taking him down as payback in Season 3. It's highly unlikely Stringer ever saw him the same way, more of a nuisance.
Author Avatar: Word of God confirms he's based heavily on Ed Burns, the co-creator of the show.
Badass Pacifist: McNulty rarely gets into a fight, but he regularly and casually stares down dangerous criminals. When the SWATs are ready to perform a full out assault, he simply strolls into the Barksdale lair, like a walk in the park, arrests Avon nonchalantly and delivers a Badass Boast to Stringer: "Catch you later."
Born in the Wrong Century: Jimmy probably would've been right at home fifty years prior in a setting where police had more leeway and deference and the lines of good and evil were clearly defined by everyone. He simply isn't suited to a time where police are expected to stick rigidly within rules and obey a chain of command built more around those higher up looking good than actually helping anyone.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Despite his dysfunctional private life and serious drinking problems, Jimmy is a very talented and driven investigator, and he has quite the eye for detail, often noticing seemingly trivial clues and connections that others miss. Discussed Trope at length. Especially at his mock funeral in the finale.
Landsman: Natural police, but Christ, what an asshole!
Byronic Hero: Hot-blooded, alcoholic, workaholic womanizer with quite a reputation. This is his ironic answer to Landsman about his previous whereabouts in the very first episode.
Drinking. Crack smoking. Whoring myself on the streets of Baltimore.
Catchphrase: "What the fuck did I do?" Played for laughs and drama. Frequently used sarcastically (i.e. "What the fuck did I do?"), to demonstrate his inability to acknowledge his own stupid mistakes.
The Chains of Commanding: In season 5 he's trusted with some managerial duties and responsibilities, with varying and ironic results
[to Lester] You're a supervisor's nightmare.
Character Development: Played with. After he settles down with Beadie he moves away from investigation quests, along with boozing and womanizing, "Good"-ol'Jimmy is back in Season 5, not before earning quite a few incredulous remarks about his domesticated state.
Lester: World is on its hole when Jimmy McNulty is the most qualified to drive.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: One of his bigger character flaws. While McNulty will usually restrict it to going behind the backs of his superiors to get what he wants, he'll also throw his colleagues under the bus or otherwise exploit them if he believes it is for the benefit of his investigations.
Commuting on a Bus: in season 4, when he resigns from MCU, works as a patrolman and gets his personal life back together.
Cowboy Cop: Deconstructed. McNulty plays by his own rules and goes against his superiors, and while he backs it up by being a brilliant detective, his antics end up destroying both his career and his family life.
Also, on multiple occasions Jimmy bends and breaks rules to get information because he doesn't have the patience for doing things according to the rules... and gets exactly the same information that other good detectives like Bunk and Lester got by following procedure.
He may also be seen as a Reconstruction of the trope. He has the traits, but he's smart enough to gather evidence through surveillance and isn't one for hotheaded violence. Additionally, when he does break the rules, they tend not to be the constitutional ones intended to protect the individual rights of citizens (the biggest constitutional violation in the series is actually Freamon's illegal wire, which McNulty merrily used but didn't actually come up with), but rather the budgetary and protocol rules that are supposedly aimed at keeping the police under the control of the elected politicians, but are actually most often used to protect the asses of the BPD higher-ups.
Fuck the bosses.
Culturally Religious: Outside of the Catholic guilt that seems to fuel his Determinator status on the job, he's not shown as especially religious outside of jokingly balking at being offered Bushmills, a "Protestant" whiskey, over his preferred Jameson.
Deadpan Snarker: He usually voices his objections in a sardonic way.
Decoy Protagonist: Deconstructed, as McNulty's tendency to act on his ego ends up making him the center of attention, even when the actual importance is on other things. Despite Dominic West getting first billing (and the rest of the cast being billed alphabetically by last name), The Wire has a true Ensemble Cast. McNulty has a larger role in some seasons (1 and 5 especially), but plenty where he's much less involved, especially Season 4 where he effectively becomes a minor recurring character.
The trope is clear as early as Season 2, as McNulty does his independent investigation into the girl's murders and tries to show it off to Lester and Bunk, who are both very capable detectives that were already assigned to the case. As such they already knew everything McNulty was about to tell them. The whole reason McNulty was acting out was because he was bored and unengaged in the Marine unit.
The final shot of the series where McNulty drives out of frame while there is a Fade to Black on the city visually indicates that the real protagonist of the show is Baltimore itself and McNulty is just one of many rotating cast members in the city's story.
Defective Detective: Lampshaded; Freamon observes that despite his excellent police work, the rest of his life is a train wreck.
"The things that make me right for this job, maybe they're the same things that make me wrong for everything else."
Defensive "What?": It's his own goddamn catchphrase.
Descent into Addiction: In Season 5, McNulty's alcoholism (which was under control during the previous season), comes back with a vengeance, as does his womanizing, despite him practically being married to Beadie at that point. That said, although he's constantly drinking, it's a fair argument that McNulty's true addiction is his own ego and feeling like he matters. Booze and women are just the outlet he uses for that until he hatches the fake serial killer plot to catch Marlo.
The Determinator: When Jimmy is on to something or is working a case he cares deeply about, he gives it everything he has and doesn't let anything, even the basic rules of police work, stand in his way. This is regularly shown as a positive and negative trait as it allows him to be a good detective and overcome obstacles that would stop others but also means he is unable to pull back or consider that he might be in the wrong and he abandons any sense of self-preservation in order to be proven right.
Daniels: You ever see how a dog gets when he smells a bone buried in the yard?
Rawls: Yeah, and I seen one take a shit on my carpet, too. And don't give me that he's-got-that-fire-in-the-belly garbage, either. The answer is no.
Didn't Think This Through: A serious and recurring issue for Jimmy is his tendency to not fully consider the consequences of is actions and then act blindsided when they come up later, usually when he doesn't respect the chain of command.
Drinking on Duty: Multiple examples. Prominent ones during season 5 (pictured◊) and in his prequel segment.
Drowning My Sorrows: Doesn't need much of an excuse to prop up the bar, but he always does it if he's distraught.
Drunk Driver: At times.
Embarrassing Nickname: "Bushy Top" from his time as a patrolman in the Western District.
Everyone Has Standards: Despite being willing to fake a serial killer in order to catch Marlo, he's one of just a handful of cops on the show who never engages in Police Brutality.
Fallen Hero: By the end of the show. And despite his fake serial killer plan being somewhat successful, he is driven out of the force in the end. The ending does suggest that he's on a path to becoming a better person since he rekindles his relationship with Beadie and brings the homeless man he stashed in Virginia back to Baltimore, but he has a long way to go.
Fatal Flaw: Pride. Jimmy has a compulsive need to prove his intellect and has tied pretty much all his self-worth into his image as the smartest cop in any given room. When this image is threatened, he tends to make very bad mistakes in order to reassert his own intellect.
Foot-Dragging Divorcee: Jimmy needs a lot of time to understand that Elena wants to move on with her life. He ends paying $3000 per month as alimony, and he can't afford it.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Downplayed as other detectives do like him, since Jimmy is a pretty charming guy on a good day, but many are regularly pissed at his reckless approach to his work, disinterest in rules and protocol and obliviousness to how his behavior affects others.
Gay Bravado: Engages in this with Bunk every now and then.
Good Is Not Nice: Unlike many in the Baltimore Police Department, he has a deep emotional investment in bringing the bad guys to justice. He's also, as Rawls puts it, a gaping asshole.
Guilt Complex: Makes the sign of the Cross before tampering with the vagrants, apologizing beforehand, and Bunk theorizes his background is the reason behind Jimmy giving a damn about a random dead woman.
Bunk: How does that matter? You see, this is that Catholic shit, Jimmy. This is that little altar-boy-guilt talking.
Handsome Lech: A drunken womanizer prone to banging floozies in bar parking lots.
Heel Realization: It took him five seasons, but he does eventually come to see that ignoring good police procedural work and just doing his own thing without regard to the consequences ultimately causes more problems than it solves. Too bad he'll never work as a policeman again after the end. See He Who Fights Monsters below.
Hell-Bent for Leather: Very fond of his vintage leather jacket, which evokes at least the looks of a Hardboiled Detective.
Heroic BSoD: Briefly goes into one in the first season after Kima gets shot including acting out the Vomiting Cop trope. Rawls of all people snaps him out of it.
Heroic Wannabe: His desire to be a cop is driven by this persona.
He Who Fights Monsters: In his quest against Marlo, McNulty becomes a prosecutable criminal by inventing a fake case, technically embezzling money and being indirectly responsible for the death of two vagrants. A mild version of the trope in that he keeps his morals after all it's said and done in the Stanfield case, as illustrated by his last scenes and his crimes are not even remotely comparable with Marlo's.
Hired to Hunt Yourself: In Season 5, he is the lead investigator on the Serial Killer case. He's so overwhelmed with resources that he quite capably diverts them to actual police work. Eventually he's given a right-on-the money FBI profile about himself.
Honor Before Reason: Jimmy refuses to play the game and puts doing his work above everything else, even loyalty to those who have put their neck on the line for him like Daniels and his own well-being. This blows up in his face regularly.
How's Your British Accent?: Pretends to be a British businessman to go undercover in a brothel. It's bloody orrible, nowhere near Sheffield-born Dominic West's natural accent.
Cwoikey! I was lookin' to get a little hanky-panky, and this one bloke gave me this number to cawl when I got acwoss the pond
Inferiority Superiority Complex: For all his arrogance and abrasiveness, McNulty believes deep down that if he isn't being a detective and catching bad guys his life doesn't amount to anything and he is basically worthless.
It's All About Me: Self-confessed. Jimmy doesn't lack empathy and cares deeply about helping those he can, but when he sets his mind to something, nothing will interfere with his quest, come hell or high water.
Landsman: Jimmy is an addict, sir. [To] himself. It's not funny, it's a fucking tragedy.
Jerkass Has a Point: The vast majority of Jimmy's gripes with the police department and hierarchy and how they impede cops from actually helping anyone are dead on, even if his methods and belief that the rules based around that don't apply to him are questionable to say the least.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: He may be a womanizing insubordinate asshole, but he does care about being a good cop and helping others, and his screw-ups hit him VERY hard.
Jumping Off the Slippery Slope: The fake serial killer in Season 5.
Knight in Sour Armor: Jimmy has no illusions about the streets or the realities of the department, but he still cares about doing good and helping people.
Knight Templar: His pals suggest it sometimes, due to the mayhem he causes. Jimmy himself wonders if they are right.
You start to tell the story, you think you're the hero, and then when you get done talking...
The Last DJ: Doing actual police work is a sure way to harm your career. A recurring theme in the first season is that McNulty's career is hanging by a thread due to him embarrassing the police brass with Judge Phelan and the press, which eventually escalates to Rawls outright trying to find an excuse to get Jimmy fired. At the end of the first season and through part of the second he is reassigned to riding a boat in the harbor unit, a duty he absolutely despises. The trope is somewhat played with, however, since it's often pointed out that some serious character flaws such as self-destructiveness, arrogance, and a need to prove himself to everyone around him are part of what drives him to such extremes and makes him willing to put his career on the line, not just a moral drive to do the right thing.
Last-Name Basis: Even Russell's kids call him McNulty. Bunk and Freamon do use Jimmy, especially when they want to talk him out of something.
Lovable Rogue: Jimmy is a very harsh deconstruction of this trope. He's a charming, determined and intelligent cop with a sly wit and little regard for rules or authority and who follows his own instincts and moral compass in order to do what's right, not caring about the cost to himself or who he pisses off. In almost any other setting, he'd be the hero whose cavalier attitude is treated as endearing and the only way to get results. In this world, he's a barely functional trainwreck whose disrespect for those he works with and for and belief that the rules don't apply to him end up causing even more problems for himself and everyone around him.
Making Love in All the Wrong Places: Less wrong when you can flash a badge to the patrolmen and then continue about your business.
Manchild: Jimmy is pretty immature, to say the least, and it's not treated as endearing or a harmless flaw either:
McNulty: You know what they call a guy who pays that much attention to his clothes, don't you?
Bunk: Mm-hmm, a grown-up.
Married to the Job: As Freamon says in this get-a-life scene.
Lester: Oooh, you need somethin' outside of this here. The job won't save you Jimmy.
Men Can't Keep House: The status of his apartment is reflective of the status of his wrecked life.
AM/FM Characterization: He's a fan of Punk Rock such as The Pogues and The Ramones.
Mistaken for Racist: Played with; he poses as a bigot with a sheriff, assuming the man would be a prejudiced hick. He has to backpedal when he learns that the guy's wife is black.
No Good Deed Goes Unpunished: He is demoted at the end of season 1 for his role in bringing the Barksdales to justice. Happens again in 5 when he brings Marlo's crew to justice barring Marlo himself.
Officer O'Hara: Averted - he's of Irish descent (and possesses a couple of stereotypical traits), but he is a competent detective and doesn't have a comedy accent.
Off the Wagon: In season 5. The results are predictably disastrous for both Jimmy and everyone around him..
The Only One Allowed to Defeat You: The way he sees his enemy, Stringer. He is the only one who is moved by his death soon after the latter was killed.
Ooh, Me Accent's Slipping: Dominic West's natural English accent leaks through on occasion, especially in the first season.
Out of Focus: In Season 4. He does not appear in 4 episodes of the Season (while appearing in all episodes of all the others), and since he's working on patrol, he's not involved in any of the active investigations. He comes back into focus at the end when he takes an interest in the Stanfield case.
Parental Neglect: McNulty loves his kids Sean and Michael but won't be up for any father-of-the year awards.
Due to his tight schedule, he has his kids mixed with less-than-exemplary companions such as Omar and Bubbles.
Loses sight of his children when they are made to play-tail Stringer in a market.
He doesn't really know the first thing about his kids' education or whether Sean is in sixth or seventh grade.
He leaves the kids alone in the house to have a quickie in a hotel, in the middle of the night.
Pet the Dog:
Goes out of his way in the case of the thirteen "Jane Does" (unidentified dead women) and involves himself in a personal, humane level when nobody from Homicide gives a damn about'em. This shows Beadie that deep down, McNulty is a decent guy.
Going to pick up the homeless man he stashed in Virginia as part of his scheme, the implication being that he's going to get him help.
Phrase Catcher: His assholism is referenced by almost every character, often. He's also a magnet for "My office, now!"
Police Brutality: Averted; he's basically the only character affiliated with the police who's never seen beating a suspect.
Prodigal Hero: Considered and often called the prodigal son and the black sheep due to his on-off relationship with Homicide and the MCU.
Pyrrhic Victory: Takes down Marlo's crew in Season 5 and ultimately is thrown off the force but Marlo is never allowed to return to the streets again and is forced to retire which unlike Stringer, is Marlo's own personal hell.
Reassigned to Antarctica: Twice. First to the Marine unit by Rawls and then of his own accord to Patrol. The second time he actually prefers it though.
Reassignment Backfire: Rawls puts him on the boat. Jimmy still finds a way to get back at Rawls and shove one major case up his jurisdiction, for the lulz.
Rawls: (laughing) Fuckin' Jimmy. Fuckin' with us for the fun of it. I gotta give the son-of-a-bitch some credit for wit on this one. Cocksucker.
Red Oni: To Bunk's Blue Oni (alternatively, to Kima's or Lester's Blue).
Sex with the Ex: Just the once, leading Jimmy to think Divorce Is Temporary. It isn't.
Shirtless Scene: Several. For a borderline alcoholic who usually looks like he slept in his clothes, Jimmy is in pretty good shape.
Shotgun Wedding: He dropped out of college and married Elena after she got pregnant.
Sympathetic P.O.V.: The narrative shows how some of his twisted shenanigans stem from personal righteousness and rebellious charm.
Tall, Dark, and Handsome: Lean, black-haired and good-looking, probably too much for his own good, even scoring while comatosely drunk.
Three-Way Sex: Jimmy is bloody outnumbered◊ in a bordello, with sexy results. Other characters are still talking about it several seasons later.
Too Clever by Half: He's too competent for his own good, smart enough to chase criminals like Avon and Stringer but not smart enough to work around his own flaws. It speaks volumes that his only period of stability happens when he is away from investigative tasks.
Toxic Friend Influence: To everyone who indulges him, but specially to Bunk, Lester and Sydnor in season 5, because Jimmy's illegal schemes compromise their integrity. In his determination, without malice but steadily, Jimmy is a dangerous chum that drags people towards his cutting-corners, destructive course.
Lester: You put fire to everything you touch McNulty, then you walk away while it burns!
Tragic Hero: The same traits that make Jimmy heroic and why the audience can never fully turn against him such as his determination, intelligence and genuine desire to do good and help others, especially those no one else in the department gives a shit about, also regularly come back to haunt him and eventually destroy his career after nearly wrecking his personal life for the second time.
Ungrateful Bastard: Willing to stab Daniels in the back through Colvin despite Daniels working to get McNulty off the boat, much to Daniels' Tranquil Fury. Unlike most examples, this is not for personal gain but to do his work. Jimmy puts the job above everything else, even personal loyalty.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Bunk.
What the Hell, Hero?: Receives these, in tandem with "The Reason You Suck" Speech, on a regular basis.
Bunk: There you go. Givin' a fuck when it ain't your turn to give a fuck.
Subverted in season 5 when Bunk brings Lester to the loop, hoping to end the serial killer scheme. Lester objects because the lie needs more wings to fly.
Lester: Shit like this actually goes through your fucking brain?
Working with the Ex: Has an affair with Rhonda at the beginning of the series. They keep working together occasionally after the break-up. He's very cool about Daniels dating her.
Worthy Opponent: Intellectual vanity is one of his motors. He is proud to be chasing Avon and Stringer, on the basis that stupid criminals make stupid cops.
Wrong Genre Savvy: Jimmy seems to believe he's the heroic cop whose devotion to his work and disinterest in rules is the only way to get the job done, even if it pisses off those in charge and rubs some of his colleagues the wrong way. In reality, he's widely regarded as a selfish, insubordinate jerkass whose flaws end up negating his noble efforts and making things worse for everyone, especially himself.