Actually Pretty Funny: His reaction when Stringer tells him that Clay Davis just walked away with thousands of dollars out of his pocket to bribe the city planning commission.
Ambiguous Situation: When he tells Herc how pleased he is that Marlo is using a cellphone because the police will be wiretapping him soon. Was he just doing his usual Evil Gloating or was he signaling for Herc to leak the number to his old police contacts?
Amoral Attorney: He not only defends members of the Barksdale gang (as well as other drug crews), but introduces them to investors, advises them on who "needs to go", and sells confidential court papers under the counter to all comers thanks to a stooge in the courthouse. Although Levy is at least realistic in that he doesn't just defend the drug lords because he's evil, but rather because he makes extra profit doing it, so he really does fit the "amoral" part. When he learns that Marlo Stanfield is using a cell phone, he says that he'll be making a lot of money from Marlo soon because the cops will have charges against him soon.
The Bad Guy Wins: The outcome of the Stanfield case, with Marlo walking away free, is a huge success for him, as his reputation and prowess as a drug-dealer lawyer becomes legendary.
Bald of Evil: Becomes balder as the story progresses and never shows one bit of honesty or remorse.
Be Careful What You Wish For: When Levy goes to meet Orlando in jail, after he had gotten arrested in a sting operation, Levy mocks him in a particularly cruel way.
You wanted to be in the game, right? Now you're in the game.
Evil Counterpart: Of Rhonda Pearlman as a corrupt private defense attorney versus her as a (relatively) clean state prosecutor.
Evil Genius: Functions as this (specifically as The Fixer) for the Barksdale and Stanfield crews, helping them set up fronts and side businesses to hide their activities from the police and evade prosecution.
Evil Laugh: He visibly tries hide one when he negotiates with the State's Attorney's Office and Police from a strong position.
Faux Affably Evil: He maintains a facade of professional civility, but it does nothing to change how slimy he is.
Final Boss: Even though Marlo is the Big Bad of the final season, Levy is the last threat who needs to be neutralized in the final episode in order to see Stanfield punished, since Marlo is arrested in the penultimate episode and Levy quickly determines the case seems to be based on an illegal wiretap. Also in the penultimate episode, Clay Davis points Lester in Levy's direction as a target to investigate. Lester at the beginning of the finale episode has Gary DiPasquale make an incriminating call, and Rhonda uses it to blackmail Levy into a deal that forces Stanfield to retire from the drug trade and puts away all his lieutenants.
Flat Character: He can be summed up as a greedy and smug legal titan but lacks the nuance of other antagonists. Why a talented mind like his relishes immersing himself in the amoral aspects of the game (beyond money) is never explored.
Greedy Jew: He is very visibly Jewish, and at one point he gleefully remarks that he likes seeing his clients busted by the cops, because it means more billable hours for him.
Happily Married: He speaks fondly of his off-screen wife, Yvette (and her brisket) and gets annoyed when McNulty arrests D'Angelo during what he considered personal time with her. There is also no hint he visits prostitutes or is unfaithful. His attendance at Stringer and Avon's parties is just to discuss business and introduce contacts.
Hypocrite: During Bird's court case, he calls out Omar for being a "parasite that leeches off the drug trade" despite the fact that such a description also applies to himself. Omar is well aware of the irony.
Omar: Just like you, man.
Implied Death Threat: Played With, since it's not Levy that would carry out the threats. A perk of having his clientele (Bad Boss gangsters) is that he can dish these out on uncooperative low-level members on their behalf, as he does to Orlando when he first refuses to sign over the liquor license for the nightclub.
Levy: Is that what you want me to tell him? That I asked you to sign and you wouldn't?
Jerkass: Scathing towards D'Angelo several times in Season 1. Though he speaks professionally, he acts very unpleasant whenever he has the upper hand, such as when he forces Orlando to sign the papers that transfer the liquor license.
Karma Houdini: The reveal of his corruption would certainly lead to disbarment and probably jail, but he's never punished for it. Thanks to Freamon's work, Pearlman does hold a sword over his head in the form of evidence with which she can charge him with grand jury tampering, but Levy is offered a deal in the Stanfield case to keep it a secret and ends the story unscathed and reinforced, with the gained renown of being the one who kept kingpin Marlo Stanfield out of jail in a major drug case.
The Man Behind the Man: While introduced as just The Fixer for the Barksdales, Levy's importance in the structure of the drug trade of Baltimore is gradually revealed to be much bigger than first thought.
While the Barksdales have front businesses in Season 1 that he helped set up, Season 3 has them build a large amount of legitimate wealth because Stringer's commitment to doing business, and Levy is the person that introduces these contacts. Levy is also the one the spots Clay Davis rainmaking Stringer.
It's revealed that Prop Joe uses Levy as his lawyer too, and has Marlo do the same, which means a majority of the laundered drug money of Baltimore runs through him.
He uses Herc to pump his old coworkers for information about clients and has a mole in the Grand Jury to leak him sealed cases, which ends up giving him an unnatural amount of reach for a defense attorney.
Only in It for the Money: He's not a criminal lawyer out of friendship with the clients or any lofty ideas about drugs, he just makes a lot of money doing it.
Orcus on His Throne: In Season 5, despite his actor being Promoted to Opening Titles. Until the finale, Levy is seen exclusively in his office while meeting his clients and talking to Herc, rather than out on the field like in Season 1. It's not the end of the season when all of the Stanfield leaders are arrested that he steps into the spotlight and ends up becoming the Final Boss to the series.
Pet the Dog: He shows genuine affection to Herc and treats him well. This doesn't make him any less scummy, as it just encourages Herc to do better work as a Punch-Clock Villain.
Psychotic Smirk: This is often how his smiles look.
Shut Up, Hannibal!: McNulty calls him out on his immorality in "The Hunt", finally fed up with his attitude following Kima getting shot, and demands that Levy hand over Savino to them, threatening to investigate his shady finances should he refuse.
Smug Snake: So much so that he spends most of his negotiations with the authorities trying to stifle laughter. He's good at his job, but so arrogant he does little to earn the audience's sympathy.
Spotting the Thread: He realizes there is something fishy in the Stanfield case and quickly figures it to be consistent with an illegal wiretap.
Villainous Breakdown: Both times are downplayed but present.
He's quite clearly agitated when Omar's insulting and convincing testimony causes him to lose the Bird case, slamming his briefcase hard in frustration. Bird's own Villainous Breakdown didn't help matters as well.
When he's confronted with the call that incriminates him, his look changes to one of sheer terror, but he regains his composure quickly and manages to remind Rhonda they have a Mutually Assured Destruction situation (with Rhonda facing obstruction of justice and Levy facing bribery of a State's attorney, both of which have long prison sentences) and negotiates a better deal for Stanfield than what Rhonda originally offered for him, which was ten years. Keeping the composure is ultimately why Levy ends the series in a better position than he ever had.
Villain with Good Publicity: Rhonda mentions offhandedly that Levy is a past officer of the Monumental Bar Association, so he can't be antagonized too much.
Yiddish as a Second Language: Drops Yiddish words and phrases into his conversation constantly.