Anti-Villain: Only begins stealing cargo and selling drugs in order to provide for himself and his baby mama.
Nick: Let's have you working only five or six days a month and see how you do!
Audience Surrogate: He knows that Frank is dirty, but not how dirty, and so learns about the Greeks' operations at the same time as the audience.
Big Brother Mentor: Tries to be this to his cousin Ziggy, but Ziggy is too Chaotic Stupid to take his (or anyone's) advice.
The Big Guy: He's 6'4 3/4", in height and can more than handle himself.
Foil: To D'Angelo Barksdale. Both come into life of crime thanks to their uncles, both try to break away from it, both are young fathers. The differences in class and race form the contrast between them.
He Knows Too Much: The Greeks end up deciding this about him, but are unable to do anything about it because of the police tail sitting outside his house around the clock, so they eventually let him just be a loose end.
Heroic BSoD: He goes through a few of these most notably when he gets the news about Ziggy shooting Glekas. It causes him to try to make a deal with Vondas and also has him get drunk and cheat on his wife with Prissy (one of Ziggy's exes). Then it gets worse when Frank's body is found, which has him give himself up to inform on the Greeks.
Hypocrite: He lectures Ziggy on hiding any sign they came into money when Ziggy buys a new expensive leather coat after their first scheme, and thinks lowly of drug dealers. However, when he starts dealing drugs, he takes to it easily, buys a new truck, and misses days of work he could have picked up.
Let Me at Him!: Tries to go kill the Greeks when he finds out about his uncle's death and a number of the union guys are needed to hold him down.
Put on a Bus: Despite supposedly being sent away from Baltimore for his own protection, he reappears in season 5 as a heckler at Carcetti's harborside photo-op.
Sibling Yin-Yang: With his cousin Ziggy. (Despite being cousins, the two are more like brothers.) Nick is smart (albeit not tech savvy) level-headed, and perfectly happy being a working man and staying on the right side of the law. Ziggy meanwhile is unhinged, acts out in wildly unpredictable and temperamental ways, and is convinced that crime and drug dealing is a quick and easy path to bigger money than legitimate work.
The Smart Guy: Of the Sobotka family.
Too Clever by Half: Much like several other characters, Nick comes from one world (in his case, the legitimate, working man's world), and winds up trying to dabble in another (the criminal underworld), but gets himself in trouble because he doesn't know the conventions and rules of the world he's dabbling in. While Nick clearly has a good head for the business and can see some outcomes in advance (such as why it would be a bad idea to try to have the Greeks kill Cheese), he's very naive to the ways of the street and the drug trade, and thus doesn't realize ahead of time that he should never keep drugs and money stashed at his family home. He learns the hard way when he comes home to find that the police bashed down his door and exposed him to his family and baby mama.
Unable to Support a Wife: If it was just him, he might take his chances with the work he has, but having a baby mama/girlfriend and baby with many expenses, which means he can't take chances with where money is coming from.
Witness Protection: Where he ends up, but according to David Simon, he opted out of it after a while. This explains his reappearance as a heckler in a season 5 episode.
Working-Class Hero: A young stevedore who can feel it gradually dying, desperately looking to find a job so he and his don't get phased out so real estate developers can build luxury apartments over the ruins.