Alas, Poor Villain: His downward spiral and death is seen as this by many fans. Despite him being a murderous drug dealer who setup D'Angelo Barksdale's death and then had an affair with his woman afterwards, he was also shown as a thoughtful man who wanted to leave the life of crime and become a legal business man. He ends up getting screwed over by Senator Clay Davis when he tries to go legit, and his scheming finally catches up with him, to the point he can no longer talk his way out it. Finally, he decides to Face Death with Dignity.
Ambition Is Evil: Played with:
Inverted in that his ambition to rise above the gangster life implies a pragmatic approach to crime and a reduction of violence, leading to a cooperative of businessmen.
Played straight as his desire to rise makes him do increasingly evil things.
Arch-Enemy:
McNulty comes to see Stringer as his. Even though Avon is technically the head of the Barksdale Organization, McNulty considers Stringer, as the brains of the operation, his main intellectual opponent. This leads to an odd moment of Antagonist in Mourning after Stringer is killed - while the Major Crimes Unit eventually gains enough evidence to dismantle the Barksdale Organization and specifically implicate Stringer, he is murdered by Omar and Brother Mouzone before he can be arrested. This devastates McNulty, as he bitterly notes that Stringer will never know that McNulty beat him.
He also becomes one to Omar, being the one who had Omar's boyfriend Brandon brutally tortured and killed. After this results in Omar going on a single-minded Roaring Rampage of Revenge against the Barksdale Organization, the enmity becomes personal for Stringer as well, who goes so far as to try to have Omar killed on a Sunday while he was taking his grandmother to church, violating of a long-standing truce respected by everyone in Baltimore's criminal underworld.
Big Bad Duumvirate: In Season 3 with Avon Barksdale, even if he's still outwardly The Dragon, both are aware that Stringer over the last few years has gained a lot of influence in the organization. It ends up being a Big Bad Ensemble due to the introduction of Marlo - who starts a gang war against them and eventually proves to be a more violent and ruthless sort of gangster - as well as the growing rift between himself and Avon which culminates in Stringer betraying him to Bunny Colvin.
Big Bad Wannabe: What he ultimately is. Stringer is smarter than the average Baltimore gangster, but he is only really educated and intelligent by the standards of his street peers, and worse he tends to misunderstand the nature of the game, to the point of Avon often having to correct him when he attempts inappropriate solutions to his problems. As a prime example of the latter, Stringer gets angry when Slim Charles refuses to carry out a hit on Clay Davis, and Avon has to spell out why assassinating a state senator is a very bad idea. He overestimates his own intelligence and underestimates the intelligence of those around him as a result, not realizing that street smarts matter more than college smarts when it comes to street crime. Part of his problem is that he wants a low profile and doesn't want to act as Big Bad, but still has to before retooling his organization, and as Avon points out, he may be too smart for his fellow criminals, but he might not be smart enough for the white collar world he aspires to, and is thus playing an intellectual more than actually being one.
Blue Oni: Stringer is an intelligent, icy cold, and calculating individual who has little if any use for many things that other gangsters obsess over, such as showing off money and possessions, or having a street reputation, or proving his badassery to the world. Stringer only cares about business, money, and keeping it flowing. This makes him a contrast in several different ways to various characters;
His best friend since childhood and partner in the drug trade, Avon, is more violent, proud and impatient, and lives and dies for the gangster street code. Avon often takes actions that Stringer never would solely to maintain his street reputation and name, while Stringer is willing to violate unwritten codes of the street that Avon holds sacred because they simply don't matter to Stringer, especially if they stand in the way of getting other things done.
Bodie starts off the series as a younger, hotheaded thug who is enraptured by gangster mystique and only really knows the street level of the drug trade. Once Stringer notices him and promotes him to a mid-level position, he starts trying to mentor Bodie somewhat and give him advice on tempering his more rash and violent ways.
Finally there's the extremely competent but hotheaded Detective McNulty, who is driven by a desire for glory and ego gratification. Once McNulty becomes obsessed with arresting Stringer, it becomes a contest between McNulty's stubborn determination and Stringer's caution and scheming.
Catchphrase: "It's just business." He also has a thing about closing and shutting doors...
The Chains of Commanding: Often expresses his frustration with the lack of talent he has available and the hardships of ruling the organization like a proper business. He compares himself to a CEO who has no choice except to take responsibility for a mishap or scandal and then deal with the aftermath of it while all other employees can keep their heads down and go about their lives.
Lester Freamon: Heavy is the head that wears the crown.
The Chessmaster: A complete deconstruction. He uses people as pawns in his schemes and deceptions... and one by one they either learn of his deceptions and start working against him, or wind up becoming a Spanner in the Works. In the end, playing with the lives of people catches up to him and he is killed by two men he had attempted to manipulate into killing each other.
Chess Motifs: Stringer is the queen for his initiative and reach when it comes to the Game. As D'Angelo says, it is the get shit done piece.
Chronic Backstabbing Disorder: There are relatively few characters that Stringer interacts with that he doesn't betray, undermine, or secretly work against.
The Con: He founds the real estate agency "B&B" and engages in some insider trading and traffic of influence. Eventually the scam victim is Stringer himself.
The Consigliere: In Season 1 he tends to act as the top advisor to Avon, offering coolheaded pragmatic advice. Problem is, Avon isn't always receptive to logical and practical advice, particularly if it clashes with Avon's gangster ethos.
Criminal Craves Legitimacy: Wants to move away from the dangerous world of drugs and into more legitimate venues.
Cut Lex Luthor a Check: He plans to apply his shrewd knowledge of economics to become "the bank", winning the game through real estate, legitimate business and untraceable laundered money, shifting away from the risky street trafficking.
Deadpan Snarker:
Especially sarcastic when talking about D'angelo:
What he getting himself robbed again!?.
His exasperatedly patient commentary on how to dispose of the guns in the Season 2 premier has to be seen to be believed. When they inevitably mess up and the guns land on a passing barge and turned over to the police, Stringer responds in kind.
No no no, that's a very simple thing, my nigga, very simple! You drive the guns to the water. You look around, you ain't see anybody, you throw the guns. In the water. *Splash*
Death by Irony: Tries desperately to move away from the gangster lifestyle and be more of a pragmatic businessman, but ends up dying a gangster's death of being riddled with bullets and buckshot. Additionally, he's very insistent about locking doors throughout the series. In his final scene, several barred doors prevent him from escaping from one of his own condominiums.
Deconstructed Character Archetype: Of the upper-class settled gangster. String's attempts to become "respectable" fail because becoming upper-class is very hard when you have no one to show you how to do it.
Ditzy Genius: The college educated, well-read Stringer can ultimately be summed up at this with a bit of The Peter Principle thrown in: He's a strong strategist who understands the importance of not drawing police attention but a weak tactician who is out of touch with the realities of dealing with aggressive drug kingpins like Marlo. His plan to set Omar against Brother Mouzone was a sound move to protect his deal with Prop Joe, but miserably executed in practice due to Stringer tipping his hand.
The Dragon: To Avon's Big Bad and Wee-Bey's The Brute. Stringer Bell is the 'go get shit done' piece, full of advice to his boss but also quite loyal to an extent in Season 1. This changes drastically in Season 2 onwards where his Chronic Backstabbing Disorder starts to surface, and he begins to take different variations on the trope.
Dragon Ascendant: When Avon is caught incriminating himself on a hidden camera while Stringer is not. After Avon's arrest, Stringer de facto takes over the reins of the Barksdale group and becomes the acting boss. At first he tries to continue coordinating the Organization's moves with Avon, but he increasingly goes behind his back and moves to take the Organization a new direction without Avon's input.
Dragon-in-Chief: Stringer considers himself to be this, and the chess motif that pins him as the Queen would agree. Plus Daniels' unit has to match wits with him as Stringer is the one who directs the Barksdales on counter-surveillance measures and running their business logistics. Ultimately, however, Stringer's skill and intellect can't quite match his ambition, and he meets his end after several major missteps that Avon saw coming.
Dragon with an Agenda: By necessity, from his perspective. He frequently takes initiatives behind Avon's back believing that his partner is simply too stubborn to be pragmatic, and too myopically ingrained in thug culture to look at a future beyond his drug corners.
Dying Moment of Awesome: More on a meta-level. Two of the baddest killers around need to team up just to take him down. He does try to run at first, sure. But once he sees he can't get away, he stands tall and reaps what he had sown.
Establishing Character Moment:
In his first appearance, he's sitting in the back of the courtroom impeccably dressed with a very business-like demeanor overseeing D'Angelo's trial and apparently taking notes in his portfolio. It turns out he's not as deep as he looks, he was drawing some puerile caricatures of himself and McNulty after noticing the scrutiny. Nevertheless, their feud is started as Jimmy congratulates him for getting D'Angelo acquitted with his witness tampering.
D'Angelo asks Stringer if his transfer to the Pit really was Avon's decision. Clearly Stringer going behind Avon's back is nothing new.
Et Tu, Brute?: Betrays and is betrayed by Avon, for the sake of the business. When cornered by Omar and Brother Mouzone, Stringer at first tries to desperately bargain for his life with them. But when Omar reveals that Avon was the one who sold out his location to them, Stringer briefly falls silent in shock, before, with clear defeat in his voice, telling the two gunmen to Get It Over With.
Even Evil Has Standards: Played for laughs when he's appalled by Fat-Face Rick's use of the word cunt.
Evil Genius: The brain of the Barksdale organization, coming up with all kinds of money laundering schemes, estate development schemes and emphasises no street violence so as not to draw police attention. A bit deconstructed considering Stringer is ultimately way too theoretical and doesn't take into account the street reality of dealing with enemies like Marlo Stanfield.
Evil Sounds Deep: He's even more ruthless than Avon and has Idris Elba's powerful voice.
Face Death with Dignity: When cornered by Omar and Mouzone after running, he just tells them to "Get on with it motherfu-".
Fatal Flaw: His Chronic Backstabbing Disorder and unrealistic view of the game is what does him in.
When one thinks about it, Stringer Bell's downfall was due to him getting his thoughts and approach backwards. During the entire battle with Marlo Stanfield's crew, and even before that when the Barksdales were basically on their own, Stringer is trying to be businesslike with what he's doing on the street. But when it comes to his real business, he's going around making shady deals, and using the sorts of practices that are more appropriate for the streets. When he discovered he was getting conned by Clay Davis and his people, he immediately wanted to have him killed until Avon stopped it. Such an action would have been appropriate, though, if he'd been targeting Marlo, and he should have left Levy to handle the legit business dealings. Stringer had both of his worlds screwed up.﻿
Avon: I look at you these days, you know what I see? I see a man without a country. Not hard enough for this right here. And maybe, just maybe.. not smart enough for them out there.
His tendency to lash out when his ego is hurt doesn't affect (or even come up) much, but one instance sealed his fate. Right after Avon insults him with the "not hard enough for this" quote, Stringer gets back at him by telling him he had D'Angelo murdered. Aside from being the absolute worst time to tell Avon this (as they're in the middle of a gang war and trust between the two is paramount), it's a major reason Avon lets Mouzone and Omar kill Stringer.
Faux Affably Evil: Puts up a charming, calm, and collected act, but when the situation doesn't go his way, that act quickly evaporates. Borders on Soft-Spoken Sadist when speaking to D'Angelo when planning to have Wallace killed:
Stringer: You know we just want to talk to him, D.
Foil:
Stringer sees himself as one to Major Colvin - reformers who feel their superiors are preventing useful work from being done, and "both trying to make sense of this game," though from opposite sides of the law.
He could be seen as one to Jimmy McNulty as his Too Clever by Half Arch-Enemy who routinely betrays his allies and bosses to suit their agendas, just like McNulty. Whilst McNulty is a drunken womanizer who's behavior affects his work routine to some degree especially so in Season 5, Stringer Bell is trying to live up to the straight and narrow business life but is obstructed by all his colleagues around him. Both suffer the consequences of colouring outside the lines - death and being fired respectively.
To Omar. They both try to conduct the game with professionalism and thoroughness, but while Omar handles business personally, Stringer delegates it to others, often with subpar results. This is best exemplified in how they dispose of guns: Omar simply goes to the water’s edge and tosses them directly, while Stringer instructs Shamrock to do it, which fails spectacularly as the weapons land on a passing ship and are retrieved by the police.
To Proposition Joe. Both are pragmatic businessmen, but while Stringer aims for sophistication, hoping to rise above a life in the underworld, he is still working under Avon and, in the end, around him. By contrast, Joe is the head of his business, making his own decisions, happy being a simple drug lord who operates out of a dingy appliance store as his headquarters, with no desire for legitimacy. However both underestimate the more murderous players in the game such as Omar for String and Marlo for Joe.
Get It Over With:
Stringer: Well, get on with it, motherf—
Gossip Evolution: Marlo goes along with getting blamed for String's death. Snoop starts spreading stories of how Chris killed String and plays up that String was a Dirty Coward.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Has shades of this in Seasons 1 and 2 during stressful situations, but in Season 3, when everything begins to fall apart for him, he practically loses all semblance of his calm and composed self in the past. It gets to the point where once he finds out Clay Davis scammed him, his first instinct is to put a hit out on him.
Hidden Depths: When McNulty and Bunk look in his apartment after his death and find it immaculate and very tastefully decorated (complete with a copy of Adam Smith's On the Wealth of Nations), McNulty remarks that he had no idea who he was chasing all this time.
Horrible Judge of Character: Not only does he not see that Clay Davis is playing him, he believes (until the end) that Marlo Stanfield is willing to end the war with a sitdown. In both cases (moreso with Marlo), it's very obvious he's off.
Hypocrite: He preaches about treating the drug game like a business and not resorting to violence until necessary. However, after learning he got robbed by Clay Davis for a small sum (compared to what the Barksdales make in a year), he's somewhat serious about putting a hit out on a state senator.
Idiot Ball:
Avon chides him for not smelling a trap and noticing that Orlando shouldn't have had so much money to buy dope on his own. Stringer concedes he made a mistake.
His usual shrewdness leaves the building when he tips his hand to Brother Mouzone in the hospital by asking, in a surprised tone, about the existence of more than one assailant. Furthermore Avon calls him out on his offers to "help" Mouzone, as a soldier like the Brother should be left to his own devices and deal with the problem himself.
He gets "rain made" easily, and Maurice Levy asks why he did not run the Clay Davis situation by him first.
Internal Reformist: Founder of the "New Day Co-Op". Sets the focus on quality product as opposed to controlling territory since turf wars draw police attention.
Ignorant of Their Own Ignorance: Stringer smugly accuses his subordinates of this from his tower of self-perceived intellectual superiority, but ultimately, Stringer is the oblivious one, as he fails to admit his shortcomings and gets conned easily in his real estate schemes by Clay Davis.
It's Personal with the Dragon: McNulty considers Bell his nemesis, rather than Barksdale. They meet several times in the courtroom and congratulate each other whenever they outdo each other in cases. Eventually, McNulty sabotages goes behind Daniel's back to get at Stringer. Once Stringer is killed, McNulty laments that he'll never know that they got him.
Jerkass Has a Point: Stringer can be harsh and condescending towards his underlings, but given the usual quality of the human resources he has at his disposal, it's not precisely uncalled for.
Kick the Dog:
Sanctions Wee-Bey and Stinkum's Cold-Blooded Torture of Brandon.
He then convinces Omar that Brother Mouzone was responsible for said Cold-Blooded Torture.
Killed Mid-Sentence: "Well, get on with it, motherf—" *BANG* BANG*
Large and in Charge: The Queen of the organization and one of its tallest members at 6'2 1/2".
The Lost Lenore: He becomes this to Donette after his death.
Manipulative Bastard: He convinces Omar to go after Brother Mouzone for killing Brandon.
Man of Wealth and Taste: When Bunk and McNulty finally find his apartment after Stringer is killed, they're shocked to see a large, very tastefully decorated apartment that looks like it belongs to a banker or intellectual.
Master of None: Avon defines him perfectly when he describes Stringer as "a man without a country": not tough enough for the street plays, and not smart enough for the suit and tie plays. Indeed, Stringer has skills across the board, but not at the sufficient level needed to compete with the specialized players, which causes Stringer to fail at both facets of the game.
Mean Boss: Speaks in a condescending tone to his underlings in Season 3, most likely due to feeling Surrounded by Idiots.
Meaningful Rename: Stringer is not only a reference to economic string theory but a good nickname for someone who manipulates people as well as a puppetmaster manipulates his puppets with the strings.
The Mentor: String is fond of Bodie and gives him advice regularly. Bodie in turn looks up to Stringer, possibly even as a replacement father figure, since Bodie never really had a father figure otherwise.
This here game is more than the rep you carry, the corner you hold. You gotta be fierce, I know that, but more than that, you gotta show some flex, give and take on both sides.
Murder Is the Best Solution: Despite his pretensions of being a legitimate businessman, Stringer's first reaction to any serious problem is to arrange a hit on someone. Not only does this frequently leave him with a worse problem than what he started with, but he becomes even more violent as he tries to move away from the gangster life and becomes insecure that he's no longer "hard enough" for the Barksdale crew. It culminates in ordering a hit on Senator Davis, something that both Slim Charles and Avon immediately recognize as an insane, suicidal idea.
Murder the Hypotenuse: Only implied, but his arranging for D'Angelo's death might've had something to do with the fact that he was also busy screwing Donette, in addition to other factors.
Naïve Newcomer: He is out of his depth in the respectable suit and tie part of the game, and quickly pays the price for it.
Avon: They saw your ghetto ass coming from miles away.
Necessarily Evil: How he puts the termination of D'Angelo to Avon, although it's pretty tenuous since D'Angelo just wanted to serve his sentence in peace.
His thought process behind snitching on Avon to Major Colvin, if he didn't Prop Joe would have cut the Barksdales out of the co-op and they would lose their drug product.
Non-Action Big Bad: Unlike Avon, a gangster who keeps a gun in his desk during wartime, street toughness is not one of Stringer's main skills. Another reason why the two have very different points of view and eventually drift apart. Avon even taunts Stringer for never personally killing anyone. To save his pride, Stringer reveals he had D'Angelo murdered.
Normal Fish in a Tiny Pond: A deconstruction. Stringer is certainly smart but he sees himself as a criminal genius rather than simply a more capable than average drug dealer and he tends to view people he works with as miles beneath him which blindsides him when they turn out to be smarter than he previously thought.
Nothing Personal: He's always invoking the "just business" angle. He calls Avon out when their feud with Omar becomes personal, a situation that gets inverted when Clay Davis cons String and Avon has to reign Bell in.
Number Two: To Avon in Seasons 1 and 2.
Only Known by Their Nickname: He is almost never referred to as "Russell". His old acquaintance, Major Colvin, is amongst the few who does.
Ooh, Me Accent's Slipping: Not to the extent of Dominic West but Idris Elba's natural London accent can be heard leaking through on occasion.
The Peter Principle: Stringer is much more effective as The Dragon to Avon in Season 1, when he tries to take over as the big boss in the following seasons things start to go very badly for the Barksdales. That's not even going into Stringer's gross mismanagement of the issues with Prop Joe's package and the turf war with Marlo Stanfield.
Politically Incorrect Villain: Calls Omar a faggot during Bird's court case.
Pragmatic Villainy: Stringer himself has no qualms with torture and murder, but his quest to become a legitimate businessman involves a market strategy that opposes violence not out of moral qualms but because it's bad for business and brings the attention of the law. When his prospects go sour, he is shown again to be a ruthless drug lord willing to kill a Senator. His and Joe's strategy has been described as cooperative capitalism, and it's a less socially destructive business model for the streets of Baltimore.
Properly Paranoid: So much so that even Lester Freamon is impressed.
Revenge Before Reason: Downplayed, but Stringer makes two moves that come from wounded ego rather than logic.
When Avon is chewing him out about how he's not hard enough for the streets, but not smart enough to go legit, that's when Stringer decides to let out the truth that he ordered D'Angelo murdered. Levy had told him to tell Avon about what's happening with Brianna's suspicions anyway, but this is the worst way to have handled it, and is likely a contributing factor for Avon betraying him to Brother Mouzone shortly after.
When he finds out that Clay Davis conned him, he tries to get Clay murdered instead of just taking the loss. Even Avon knows murdering a politician is going too far, and stops him from harassing Slim Charles to go through with it.
Rule of Symbolism: Nearly his entire death scene is this. Stringer, who came from the streets of Baltimore and unsuccessfully tried to ascend to higher ambitions is fatally trapped in the middle by the street-dressed gangster Omar on the lower floor of his condominium and the more sophisticatedly dressed Brother Mouzone on the higher floor. Then, in the vein of classic fictional gangsters (Little Caesar, Scarface (1932), Carlito's Way), String dies near a billboard illustrating his broken dreams.
Sacrificial Lion: Defined as such by David Simon, with traces of Tragic Villain. Simon explains he had to let Stringer Bell die victim of his own mistakes but also killed by the system in general, because he wanted to point out that the game cannot be reformed, underscoring how bad the situation is. Next to Marlo, Stringer is A Lighter Shade of Black, but he could not escape himself and where he was from.
Screw the Rules, I Have Connections!: McNulty recognizes his plan to escape the game is to connect himself and his money to untouchable politicians who will then protect him to guard their own business interests. McNulty goes behind Daniel's back to focus the investigation onto Stringer because of this. Stringer never gets to flex his connections to get out of any legal trouble however, as Clay Davis just rips him off. Stringer then dies over a previous street-level dispute that he wouldn't have been protected from anyway.
Self-Made Man: His goal in life, a rare feat for a man born and raised in the criminal world of West Baltimore.
Sesquipedalian Loquaciousness: From the point of view of his unrefined underlings.
Shut Up, Hannibal!: Telling Avon that he had D'Angelo killed.
Small Name, Big Ego: One of his defining flaws. Stringer repeatedly overestimates his own intellect and has an extremely high image of himself as much smarter and more sophisticated than the average drug dealer and makes serious errors as a result.
The Smart Guy: Another deconstruction. Stringer may be the most educated and cunning man in the room when he's with his Barskdale criminal associates but when he tries to integrate himself with the more experienced corporate politicians of Downtown Baltimore, he is easily manipulated and hustled by people like Clay Davis. Given time however, he may have been able to have gotten wise to corrupt politicians like him.
Smart People Wear Glasses: Needs glasses to read, and is among the few people in his organization who actually does read. The glasses give him an intellectual aura.
Smug Snake: A more subtle example, although he is undoubtedly intelligent and evasive, he is prone to academic word-dropping and only an educated character in a world full of Book Dumb heroes and villains and thus, probably not quite as clever or refined as he would like to imagine himself to be. And he is so obsessed with climbing the social ladder that he underestimates or ignores the people from his own social class and fails to quite fit in, which is particularly dangerous given those people are murderous drug dealers who are not quite as dumb as he thinks they are. The way he condescendingly speaks to his underlings in Season 3 is a good example of this.
Social Climber: Tries and fails to rise above his station in life. The show nevertheless effectively makes the point that someone with his intelligence, ambition, work ethic, and business acumen could have achieved a lot in life had he been born into an environment better than the slums of West Baltimore.
Sophisticated as Hell: Combines swearing with economic lingo. Most prominent during his Thieves' Guild meetings
Nigga you ain't got the floor, chair﻿ don't recognize your ass [...] Adjourn your asses
The Starscream: Not at first. Initially Stringer is loyal to Avon. Later, however, their friendship sours and he begins going behind his boss' back before outright betraying him.
Stupid Evil: It can be easy to miss, but the call that incriminates Stringer shortly before he is killed is Shamrock telling him that he got the shooters (hitmen) that String asked for. This implies he was planning to kill Clay Davis anyway, despite Avon shutting down this plan earlier and explaining to him why it was a horrible idea. Given he was planning to betray Avon, Stringer would have likely gone forward with the plan that would've spelled the end of his organization if he wasn't killed.
Surrounded by Idiots: Sometimes Played for Laughs a bit, the more he interacts with his subordinates, the more it becomes evident. By season 3 you can tell this is going through his head as he tries to use his business smarts to reform the Barksdale gang. Comically aggravated by his use of advanced economics terms with barely literate underlings whose intelligence is like a 40-degree day.
This Is Gonna Suck: Unlike everyone else's sheer panic at the realization Wee-Bey shot a cop, Stringer instead reacts with resigned acceptance to the impending and inevitable shitstorm.
The Three Faces of Adam: As the underboss of an established organization, Stringer has to play the role of the lord, trying to maintain the status quo while fending off threats to their power. However, his ambition to "play games beyond fucking game" turns him back into a hunter, seeking to establish and conquer new ways of doing business. His lack of focus and experience causes him to fail at both pursuits.
Too Clever by Half: His cleverness takes him several steps ahead of himself, which ultimately leads to big failures.
Avon: I look at you these days, String, you know what I see? I see a man without a country. Not hard enough for this right here and maybe, just maybe, not smart enough for them out there.
Tragic Dream: Stringer ultimately only wanted to rise above his station and become a legitimate businessman, but his arrogance, his inability to function outside of the criminal underworld, and Chronic Backstabbing Disorder led to his downfall and ultimate death.
The Unfettered: More ruthless than Avon. Not even his friendship with the man stops String from doing what he thinks needs to be done.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: His strategy of discouraging the Barksdale crew from instigating street wars to claim territory in order to keep bodies down and police attention off drug dealings is ultimately what allows Marlo to aggressively rise without any consequence or censure.
Villainous Breakdown: Basically, almost all of his scenes in "Middle Ground", but especially trying to order Slim Charles to kill Clay Davis; most of his orders have had some semblance of logic and plausibility, but this time other characters such as Avon, directly call him out for being ridiculous. His breakdown then leads up to his death.
Villainous Friendship: He's best friends with Avon. However, events in Season 3 complicate this.
Villains Out Shopping: Shown a lot of time running errands, sometimes more often than plotting drug schemes.
Visionary Villain: Has an actual plan to win the game, as money can elevate him above the "gangsta bullshit."
There's games beyond the fucking game.
White-Collar Crime: Desperately wants to shift the operations of the Barksdale organization from thuggish gang banging to this type of criminal activity. Perhaps if he was to go straight full stop, he would not have ran into the king of sleaze, Clay Davis.
Wicked Cultured: A refined drug dealer, even more by the standards of Baltimore. And Mcnulty is shocked to see Stringer's luxurious apartment. Decorated with valuable art pieces, custom samurai swords on the wall, and a bookshelf full of classic literature including Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations, and In Memory of Yet Green by Isaac Asimov.
Worthy Opponent: "Nicely done (McNulty)"
Wrong Genre Savvy: He ends up treating the game like a gentleman's or clinical world where market rules ultimately dictate everything, but the reality is more complex than what it's taught in college.
He assumes that influencing politicians and bureaucrats is a simple matter of handing over a briefcase full of cash and that bribes are a common and necessary part of the legitimate business world.
Unlike Avon, who understands the game is the game, he fails to accept that the primary reason the Barksdales got to the top in the first place was through both having muscle and flexing it. As a result, Marlo and Prop Joe actually end up playing him more than he can play them, without having to worry about reprisals.