Ambition Is Evil: Played with. When forced to choose between helping the city he was elected to save and his own political ambitions, he chooses the latter, by deciding not to take money to cover the city's budget deficit from the state because doing so will hurt his chances of being elected governor. However, the series makes the argument that it is the political system which corrupts politicians rather than the other way around.
Became Their Own Antithesis: Starts off as an idealistic crusader determined to clean up Baltimore's corruption. A year in the mayor's office molds him into a self-serving politician who's forgotten everything that he stood for.
Be Careful What You Wish For: Becomes Mayor only to be hit with a financial deficit which he spends nearly every waking hour trying to plug up.
Beleaguered Bureaucrat: For a while and also a consequence of his own ambition; he has good intentions but not the political clout or the funds to implement them.
Big Good: At first he's set up as possibly being this, but it's ultimately subverted.
The Casanova: Initially his early scenes paint him as a Kennedy-esque skirt-chaser and he was a "gash hound" in the past, but later subverted as he's not shown being unfaithful to his wife during the rest of his story arc, even turning down attempts to seduce him. It turns out that pride and vanity are his cardinal sins rather than lust.
The Chains of Commanding: Present and discussed several times. As a previous white mayor puts it, governing the city means eating shit from one community or another, day in and day out.
Corrupt the Cutie: While highly ambitious and imperfect, he still starts out with a degree of idealism and a seemingly genuine belief in turning Baltimore around, but is fast sucked into the dirty world of politics.
David vs. Goliath: A white "boy" beats the seemingly invincible two-term incumbent black mayor.
Diabolus ex Machina: Is hit with one in the form of a crippling and previously unrevealed massive deficit in the school budget, inherited from the previous administration. It sinks his reformist agenda.
Establishing Character Moment: In the end of the third episode in which he appears Carcetti commits adultery with an unnamed woman he meets at a political event, staring at himself in the mirror as he does so. Though it seems at the time to be a throwaway scene, it actually serves to highlight Carcetti's narcissism and willingness to break promises for personal gain, both character traits which play a role in his later tenure as mayor. The scene receives a Call-Back in season five, when Carcetti watches news coverage of himself making a grandstanding political speech with a similarly rapturous expression on his face.
Face–Heel Turn: Mildly and realistically so. He doesn't so much go from Ideal Hero to utter villain as go from an flawed and ambitious but well meaning reformer to just another mostly self-interested politician.
Handsome Lech: He has his boyish good looks and was initially The Casanova in the past, but ultimately subverted as he doesn't cheat on his wife once he's in power.
He Who Fights Monsters: He eventually becomes a downplayed monster himself.
Internal Reformist: Tries to be one and changes some things with his initial élan, but eventually gets assimilated by the game.
Naïve Newcomer: Though he's not politically unexperienced, he discovers that being a Councilman and governing as the mayor are two different beasts. He learns what a minefield City Hall is and that implementing a policy is like turning an Ocean liner, even if there's the chance to do it, it takes a lot of time to change course.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: He bears some resemblances to real-life former Baltimore mayor Martin O'Malley, though Simon has said the character was based on a number of Baltimore politicians, most of whom are too obscure to be recognizable to viewers.
Obstructive Bureaucrat: He increasingly becomes something of this status as the story goes on.
Pet the Dog: On an epic scale during his Baltimore cleaning spree. During his first days in office he tricks or cajoles multiple city departments that had been content to let the city go to the dumps while doing the bare minimum needed to get paid (if that) into going on a full scale city cleanup.
Reasonable Authority Figure: He's one at first after becoming mayor, but numerous factors and people rise up to cause him tremendous problems until his focus turns solely to his own political survival.
Rousing Speech: He gives a few of them, usually of the self-serving variety.
Sir Swears-a-Lot: While everyone except Omar swears a lot in this show, Tommy is particularly foul-mouthed with c-bombs as well as f-bombs.
Sleazy Politician: Eventually turns into one, though not without his hand being forced by the considerably sleazier Nerese Campbell and the king of sleaze himself, Clay Davis.
Build something downtown and stick your name on it, get the crime to go down, and stay away from schools. And keep my boyish good looks... One out of four ain't bad.
Somebody Doesn't Love Raymond: Implied. His Pride and self-serving nature often leads him to want to be seen as a good guy. Most notable in his attempt to apologize to Colvin for how the Hamsterdam experiment fell apart. Furthermore, its never made clear if he knew Steintorf reintroduced the stats game or if he had Steintorf do it in his place in order to look good to Daniels.
Spanner in the Works: He foils the mayoral ambitions of Tony Gray and Nerese Campbell, to their surprise. In turn, the latter is able to become a roadblock for Carcetti's agenda.
Took a Level in Jerkass: He becomes more and more of a Jerkass as the stress of campaigning and then running the city wears on him.