Actually Pretty Funny:
A Smug Smiler most of the time. Rawls can't help but snicker or laugh about some situations that displease him.
He praises some of Jimmy's shenanigans such as calling the first Federal deputy "an empty suit" or the stunts he pulls against Homicide from the Marine unit.
Rawls: Fucking Jimmy. Fucking with us just for the fun of it. You know, I gotta give the son of a bitch some credit for wit on this one. [chuckles] Cocksucker.
He's incensed about Hamsterdam and later burns Colvin for it, but in private he appreciates the sheer audacity and absurdity of the situation.
Rawls: Bunny, you cocksucker, I gotta give it to you. A brilliant idea! Insane AND illegal, but stone fucking brilliant nonetheless.
Badass Bureaucrat: Say what you will about Rawls, but the guy usually has his way and often wins his political or jurisdictional battles in a decisive, overwhelming fashion.
When Kima gets shot, he demonstrates his leadership and reorganizes the overcrowded and chaotic crime scene with great efficiency. In seconds, actually.
When he initially dodges the case of the 13 Jane Does, his relieved subordinates look at him with admiration and Landsman remarks that "the man is a God."
The Bad Guy Wins: While not completely villainous, Rawls is consistently shown as the pettiest and cruelest of the police commanders and yet is constantly getting promoted. Even when he thinks he's hit a racial glass ceiling (Norman says it would be political suicide if Baltimore has both a white mayor and police commissioner), in the finale Rawls manages to leap completely past being the commissioner of Baltimore and becomes the Superintendent of Maryland's State Police, making him the highest ranking law enforcement figure in the entire state.
Berserk Button: Any insubordination, undermining of his authority or going around his back will seriously piss Rawls off. Jimmy, being Jimmy, pushes said buttons on a regular basis which is why Rawls hates him so much.
Da Chief: McNulty's archnemesis, Rawls will thwart any policeman who shows any initiative or steps over the line.
Deadpan Snarker: The man has an abrupt and pointed sense of humour and loves giving very flowery, articulate insults to those who mess up under his watch.
The Dreaded: Only suicidal characters like McNulty dare to antagonize Rawls openly, and the sneaky ones like Freamon and Colvin know very well the dangers of crossing him in any way. Even his equals in rank fear Rawls while he's still a major, before he gets more powerful.
Foerster: You're going to cross Bill Rawls, as ruthless a fuck as we have in this department? No. I like my career, thank you very much.
Establishing Character Moment: Flipping the bird to McNulty and a nasty tirade against his subordinate because the detective's extracurricular actions mean that some ghetto homicides will have to be actually investigated by his department, which is both embarrassing and counter-productive to Rawls.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good: Displays signs of it occasionally. He's so immersed and invested in the stat games that he cannot fathom why the detectives would actually want to chase the bad guys. He initially assumes the serial killer scheme was all about the money and the paid overtime, not about burying Marlo, "the motherfucker who put 22 bodies on them."
Evil Is Petty: Very vindictive towards McNulty, not so much towards Daniels.
Evil Sounds Raspy: His voice is generally raspy and Rawls plays it up when he's trying to intimidate other characters with his Tranquil Fury.
Flipping the Bird: A double deuce during his establishing character moment. These are for you McNulty
Have I Mentioned I Am Heterosexual Today?: Some of his crass jokes have this vibe. His sarcastic hope that Major Colvin has a stripper waiting behind the door to present more optimistic crime stats has a whiff of this.
Hidden Depths: For as much of a hardass opportunist as he is, Rawls does show signs that he knows as well as Jimmy just how fucked up the department mentality is. There are hints there is still some some idealism left beneath his nastiness.
It's telling that his response to Bunny's Hamsterdam plan after the initial anger is genuine admiration and respect for the audacity and the fact someone with a high-ranking department was at least doing something to try and make things better rather than the same old approach. When Bunny is trying to defend Hamsterdam to Burrell and Rawls, Colvin hands a pile of letters from "community associations, ministers, businesspeople, citizens" to Burrell, who promptly dismisses them, but Rawls takes an interest in the letters and it's suggested he did read them.
He tips off Carcetti during the mayoral primary and tells him that he hopes a new mayor will change the police system. Though he was also self interested, there's the implication Rawls sincerely wanted someone to change things so that cops can simply focus on helping people.
He seemed genuinely saddened when Burrell tells him that despite what Rawls may think, he will end up as much of a Yes-Man for career politicians when he ends up in the Commissioner seat, indicating that he does want to do good with the power he gets.
Jerkass: Abrasive and hardass most of the time. He's given a few comforting moments to show that he's not completely horrible.
Jerkass Has a Point: As much of an asshole as he is, Rawls isn't wrong very often:
His lack of diplomacy and brusque ways are exactly what is needed in the aftermath of Kima getting shot. He barks orders and quickly removes unnecessary personnel from the crime scene. His blunt speech to McNulty makes Jimmy reconsider his guilty feelings.
Rawls is not completely wrong for hating McNulty for his chronic insubordination. When Daniels tries to argue for getting Jimmy transferred out of the Marine Unit, Rawls tries to block it, arguing that there's no need for someone as disobedient and disloyal as Jimmy. In the following season Daniels gets backstabbed by McNulty, who makes it clear that everything Daniels has done for him doesn't outweigh Jimmy's boner for catching Stringer Bell. In the fifth season, giving Jimmy another chance will bite Daniels yet again, this time with the fake serial killer scheme.
Daniels: You ever see how a dog gets when he smells a bone buried in the yard?
Rawls: Yeah, and I seen one take a shit on my carpet, too. And don't give me that he's-got-that-fire-in-the-belly garbage, either. The answer is no.
He brings up very good points when he demolishes a clueless Major Taylor during Comsat meetings.
This might be the only reason Rawls is able to avoid getting thrown off the force. It's that he does his job, even when it's detrimental to others.
Discussing with candidate Carcetti a ride-along experience, Rawls shows signs of Jaded Washout and admits his own frustration with the numbers game. Revealing that he doesn't believe in it himself, but he does it because he's supposed to. Encouraging a higher-up to give him the order to change.
When the homeless killer scandal blows up, Rawls finds himself in the advantageous position of not having any actual responsibility over the whole mess and yet having all the information available to screw everyone over. One look from the Mayor's staff after a remark about professionalism make them know that the bastard is already scheming, so they resort to bribing him.
Jerkass to One: Rawls is the "crueler to one" variant. He can be nasty to everyone, but focuses the viciousness on one target, Jimmy, due to the detective's perpetual disrespect for the chain of command and tendency to ignore rules and protocol. If you're a detective under his watch who isn't named "Jimmy McNulty", he may not be warm and fuzzy, but you can likely avoid the worst of his wrath if you play your cards right.
Kick the Dog: While lot of his screen time is spent being a huge asshole, Rawls generally has a reason for his cruel acts, whether to boost his career or to punish insubordination. However, one time in particular where he acts cruel with no possible justification is when he shuts down Hamsterdam while playing Ride of the Valkyries over the speakers. There was no reason to do it, except to humiliate the residents and self-aggrandize.
Over the top, gentlemen.
Lack of Empathy: With a few honorable exceptions, the man enjoys his own vileness. When Daniels asks him, as a personal favor, not to compromise the Barksdale case in Season 1, Rawls pretends to be taking a moment to consider obliging, just to twist the knife and give a no for an answer anyway.
Large and in Charge: Somewhat downplayed because a lot of cinematic tricks go into making Rawls look shorter than he is, (including the fact that Rawls is frequently sitting during many of his scenes) but he's Da Chief and his actor's height (6'3) usually makes him the tallest person in the room.
Laughably Evil: His sheer, creative abrasiveness, quick tongue-lashing and Flowery Insults can be commendable after the fact.
Mean Boss: Loves to verbally demolish and threaten his underlings. Anyone who actually dares to cross Rawls comes to find out that he's a seriously vindictive SOB who will go out of his way to screw them over in return. It's somewhat downplayed in that if you don't actively piss him off in the way McNulty does, he might not be pleasant but he will at least leave you alone as much as possible and leave the day to day stuff to Landsman who is far more reasonable.
Nothing Personal:
Oh no. Rawls is definitely one to hold a grudge and will go out of his way to punish anyone who crosses him out of pure spite.
Played straight in his bid to supplant Burrell as commissioner. When the latter confronts him about his plans, Rawls acknowledges them and almost mournfully assures Burrell that it's just business.
Burrell: We made a good team.
Rawls: We did.
Number Two: Burrell's executive officer as Deputy Ops. Despite their ups and downs, when Rawls crosses Burrell they still concur that they were a good team, and they continue their wicked association for a bit more until Burrell forcibly retires with Burrell's last scene in the series showing there's no hard feelings between the two and commiserating with Rawls about the frustrations of their work when dealing with politicians who give contradictory commands while not having a clue what police work actually entails.
Obstructive Bureaucrat: A major enforcer of "the stats game". According to himself, he wouldn't mind doing it the proper way if there was someone else kicking the stones. The problem is there is no one, so he doesn't ruffle any feathers. Upon hearing it, Norman Wilson mocks this paragon of reform.
Pet the Dog: His speech to McNulty where he tells him that Kima getting shot wasn't McNulty's fault. Done with Rawls' usual bluntness, of course, and an explanation that if it was Jimmy's fault Rawls would be the first to lay into him for it.
He genuinely wishes Burrell well after he's been all but forced to retire, reassuring him that he deserves the nice gig Carcetti is giving him instead, and showing that he sincerely valued Burrell not just as a colleague but a friend.
Playing Both Sides: During the mayoral primary, he positions himself in a way that he would benefit regardless of whether Royce or Carcetti comes out on top. He ingratiates himself to Royce by making Burrell look incompetent and promising to clean up the mess from the dead witness case, and to Carcetti by leaking the break-up between Royce and Watkins courtesy of Rawls' man in the Hall. Before election day, he also orders Landsman to assign Kima and Norris to plainclothes duty (thus stalling the witness investigation) so as not to antagonize either candidate.
Politically Incorrect Villain:
Rawls, a closeted gay (or bi) man, tends to insult people with the word "cocksucker" rather liberally.
Rawls openly uses slurs against black people (using one to describe Avon in his Establishing Character Moment) and is resentful towards his black coworkers, believing them to have an unfair advantage in employment. He also seems to support Carcetti at least partially because he's white. Despite Norman's lack of amusement, Rawls words it beautifully to Carcetti, that they both are just pretending not to be racist.
I'm no more racist than you are, Mr. Mayor.
It's unclear if it's more his racism or his classism against the poor, but he describes the murders by the Barksdale crew as ones that "don't mean a shit to anybody".
Professional Butt-Kisser: For all his abrasive mannerisms, Rawls is fully capable of sucking up to Baltimore's big wigs if he sees opportunity in it. Practically all of his scenes with Carcetti involve him being a shameless Yes-Man.
Punch-Clock Villain: As horrible as he is, he seems to leave his bad attitude at work and is even seen briefly at a gay bar, happily enjoying a drink.
Rank Up: Starts as the Major of the homicide unit. He is later promoted to Colonel and Deputy Ops, thanks, ironically, to the clearance boosts from Daniel's details, has a gig as Commissioner thanks to seniority and ends up as Superintendent of the Maryland State Police.
The Starscream: Burrell views him as a traitorous number two after Rawls makes a failed move for the top spot.
Burrell: You made your move too soon. Politics doesn't suit you. Stick to operations. And don't you ever cross me like that again.
Straight Gay: If he's in the closet, then it's a pretty rare case of being neither armored nor transparent - no obviously-false-front of homophobia or anything remotely camp. Via photos and his ring, it's shown that he is married and has an infant son, which he fondly mentions. And then again he appears in the background in a scene at a gay club, among other hints such as "Rawls Sucks Cock". It's possible he may be bisexual and simply enjoys indulging his other side every now and then.
Sympathy for the Hero: Rawls somewhat begrudgingly gives some respect to Daniels because of the loyalty Daniels shows to detectives working under him. Rawls also has his Pet the Dog moment where he keeps Jimmy from collapsing under the weight of his guilt when Kima is shot.
Villainy-Free Villain: Played with:
While Rawls only cares about stats and looking good instead of effective policing, it's downplayed in that he doesn't do anything illegal (or more accurately, anything that would get him put into prison, since juking the stats could be considered a legal grey area). However, in his nasty and vindictive antagonism, he will use whatever authority he has to punish people under him. His perpetual hindering of those doing their duty by going after the bad guys places him in a highly despicable moral territory.
Subverted in the series finale which finally pushes him in the territory of a truly villainous person by taking part in a conspiracy. Rawls (at the direction of Carcetti) covers up the serial killer lie and pins it on a mentally ill homeless person in return for a promotion to Superintendent of the Maryland State Police. Even then, he's also just trying to clean up a mess that Jimmy made, though finds a way to personally benefit from it.
Villain of Another Story: When building the serial killer scheme, Lester Freamon enlists the help of a former partner who clashed with Rawls (when Rawls was the area chief) at a crime scene and was subsequently punished and removed from Homicide.