Ascended Extra: Mostly a background character and Maritza's other half in first two seasons, Flaca finally gets a flashback episode and a more prominent role in the third one.
Bait-and-Switch Lesbians: With Maritza. The two are very close and share a kiss at one point, only to immediately laugh it off.
Deadpan Snarker: Always ready with a snide remark during a confrontation, and has plenty of banter to share with Maritza.
Disco Dan: Despite being born in '92, she loves The Smiths and Depeche Mode.
The Ditz: Less so, but she is still immature and thought that black people had different bone density.
Fish out of Temporal Water: And without time travel involved. She seems to be under the impression that emo fashion - which was already fading out when she was sentenced - is still in vogue rather than a short-lived fad from her teenage years. Various characters point it out to her, even mocking her.
Girly Girl with a Tomboy Streak: Downplayed. Like Maritza, she's very vain and girly, and she's actually the one who convinces Maritza to film a makeup tutorial with her and start their own Flaritza beauty guru Youtube channel. She also can be aggressive and sarcastic, and used to be a goth teenager.
Hidden Depths: Working on the newsletter shows she has a very firm grasp of English grammar. She also seems to have a lot of knowledge of art history, which she attributes to how "she used to bone her art teacher".
Hipster: As shown in Season Three.
You know when I'm wearing that apron? I'm wearing it ironically.
Jaywalking Will Ruin Your Life: In "Bora Bora Bora" it's humorously implied that she's in prison for illegally downloading media. Flashbacks in season 3 show that Marisol is actually in prison for selling fake LSD—as in "paper she had dampened with water"—at her school, which led to a kid injuring himself. As an aside, yes this is a crime, as any first-year law student will tell you.
Obfuscating Stupidity: "I may sound kinda dumb, but my dumbness is highly cultivated to make me more attractive to insecure men."
Only Known by Their Nickname: "Flaca" is actually a nickname, and a term used to refer to skinny women.
Perky Goth: In high school, she was gothic girl, and still considers herself one in prison. Despite this, she loves to laugh and joke around.
Schemer: Between her fake acid scam and organizing the workers in Piper's panty ring, Flaca can be pretty plucky and resourceful.
Sexy Secretary: She tries to pull this off during the mock job interview.
Spicy Latina: The other inmates agree that Flaca only got so far in the interviews due to her good looks.
Statuesque Stunner: She's one of the tallest inmates (Jackie Cruz is 5'9) and very attractive. This is especially noticeable when she shares most of her scenes with Maritza who stands at only 5'2.
Those Two Guys: With Maritza, and together, their banter makes up a good bulk of the show's comedy relief.
Too Clever by Half: Her drug fraud seen in the backstory was actually pretty well thought for a high school standard and the Insane Troll Logic she was prepared to engage if someone were to complain was rather impressive. It actually went a little too well and backfired, landing her we know where.
Yaoi Fangirl: When exploiting Bennett for contraband, she tries to get him to buy porn for her. But she wants gay porn since she finds it hotter and doesn't want to exploit women.