Affably Evil: She's a violent and delusional stalker but also genuinely very charming and sweet-natured, being the first to show Piper any kindness and reassurance and getting along with other inmates easily.
Alternative Character Interpretation: Invoked. She sees Toy Story 1 as a movie about a cowboy who's king of the castle, but then an astronaut comes in and tries to take over, so the cowboy tries to murder him, but then the astronaut is taken hostage by an evil psychopath, so the cowboy has to rescue him, then they become really good friends. Rosa eventually breaks the stunned silence with, "You've got one fucked-up perspective on the world, kid."
Ambiguous Situation: It's unclear if she's serving time for fraud, or her more serious crime of stalking and attempted murder. She's shown being prosecuted for her crimes against Christopher and his fiancée, but the inmates refer to her fraud charges more often. Given that she's in minimum security, it's more likely she was convicted on fraud charges.
Babies Make Everything Better: Believes this, and after reaming Vinnie out because she believed he was cheating on her, tells the other inmates that they're going to start trying for a baby. In fact, when she discovers that she is in fact pregnant, Nicky and Vinnie attribute it as Lorna hallucinating to invoke this trope. At least, until 12 pregnancy tests prove her right.
Basement Dweller: Before going to prison, she was living at her parents' home.
Justified in that Lorna is Italian and it's common in Italian culture for people to live with their parents until they get married and begin living with their spouse in their own house.
Berserk Button: Season 5 has hers being called crazy or insane.
Beware the Nice Ones: Morello seems to be the sweetest inmate, but she's in prison for extremely serious crimes and is dangerously delusional.
Brooklyn Rage: Has a Noo Yawk accent to match Harley Quinn and is very unstable and dangerous.
Cloud Cuckoo Lander: Initially she appears to be just a ditzy fashion-lover, but she's revealed to be a much, much darker example when it turns out that she was totally delusional about her relationship with Christopher, trying to kill both him and his fiancee with a car bomb.
Con Artist: Gets her pen-pals in Season 3 to put money in her commissary account, and gets Vinnie to beat up Christopher by telling him that he's been writing her creepy letters.
The Cuckoolander Was Right: She turns up to really be pregnant in season 5.
Culturally Religious: She grew up in a traditional Italian-American family, and was raised in the Catholic faith. She still wears a cross necklace, though she doesn't seem to be currently practicing.
Cute, but Cacophonic: She's very pretty but possesses a very shrill, high-pitched voice and the effect is enhanced by her thick accent. It's even been a surprise for fans to hear Yael Stone in real life and hear her deeper, far more pleasant voice.
The Cutie: Is sweet and friendly to everyone, holds idealistic views about love and marriage, has a cute face, cute fashion sense, petite body and a voice of a cartoon animal. It's only when we learn about her back-story, we find out she is also…
Cute and Psycho: …a delusional stalker who's tried to kill her "fiancé"'s real girlfriend. Discussed in-universe by a couple of Spanish inmates in Season 5.
Dark and Troubled Past: Morello seems to avert this at first; she's engaged to be married to Christopher, and was sent to prison for the relatively harmless crime of running a mail-order scam. But as we eventually find out, Morello is dangerously delusional, and she was never in a relationship with Christopher to begin with. They went on one date, and after he broke things off, she began relentlessly stalking him, culminating in her attempted to murder him and his fiancee with a bomb.
Despair Event Horizon: Her son's death in season 7 causes the already unstable Lorna to have a complete breakdown and lose any connection to reality she still had left.
The Ditz: There are in fact only two Boras in the locale Bora Bora, but Morello is not the sharpest screwdriver on the wall.
Doting Parent: After giving birth, Lorna talks everyone's ears off about her son and even has a friendly conversation with O'Neill about their experiences as parents. This takes a turn for the worse when Lorna insists on acting like he's still alive after he dies of pneumonia and still sharing pics of random babies online, passing them off as ones of Sterling.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones: For all her instability, Lorna adored her newborn son and is left absolutely devastated when he dies of pneumonia.
Fourth-Date Marriage: To Vinnie in Season 3.
Friends with Benefits: With Nicky, though Morello later cuts off the benefits.
Heel Realization: Eventually is forced to accept the fact that she is legitimately delusional.
Hypocrite: She's fairly racist and one time rants about how Mexicans come to America and "steal our jobs" …only her accent and view of the USA suggest she or her family are quite recent immigrant themselves.
Here We Go Again!: After getting over Christopher and moving onto Vinnie, she once again starts having violent delusions. This time it's about Vinnie cheating on her with her sister just because they hung out like she asked and they didn't seem to hate it, while at the same time maintaining a delusion that she and Vinnie are planning to have a baby, despite the two never talking about it and not being allowed conjugal visits. It turns out that she really is pregnant, due to their one time together, which the guards allowed as this was their wedding night.
Hidden Depths: Her first centric episode and a few other moments show that she's surprisingly good at make-up and maintaining her beauty regime with whatever is available to her in prison. She also at times acknowledges that she is seriously mentally ill although such moments tend to be short-lived.
Hollywood Tone-Deaf: Her attempts at singing for the Christmas pageant are poor, to say the least.
Humiliation Conga: Her arc in Season 7 is either this or Karma Houdini Warranty. It starts Lorna finding out from Vinnie that their child died of pneumonia, which causes her to smash through her Despair Event Horizon. After that she convinces herself that their baby is still alive and that Vinnie has kidnapped him, prompting him to get a divorce. She continues to deny what happened, lashing out at inmates and COs, and ultimately gets transferred to Florida.
Hypocrite: She is pretty xenophobic, viewing illegal immigrants as criminals and a danger, believing that if they will enter the country illegally, they must not have any regard for the law. Nicky is quick to point out that such a view is a bit questionable coming from someone who actually has broken the law and whose crimes are much more serious than simply entering the country illegally.
I Just Want to Be Loved: Although Lorna has a very screwed up idea of what love is, this is also true of her.
In Love with Love: One can get the impression that Lorna cares more for the idea of Christopher and marriage than the reality of both. It's entirely right.
In-Universe Nickname: The Hispanic girls call her Lorna la Loca after Christopher reveals her delusional disorder during the visit. The nickname sticks, and she hates it.
I Reject Your Reality: Lorna's entire character is built on this trope. She initially spends the first season and long before claiming to everyone who will listen that Christopher is her fiancee and true love who is eagerly waiting for her when she gets out and is sincerely convinced that this is the case, only for it later to be revealed that Christopher is a man she went on one date with and quickly scared away with her stalking behavior and he now understandably wants nothing to do with her. Later, she talks about her son as though he was still alive and can't process Vinnie leaving her, ending the series completely detached from reality.
Karma Houdini Warranty: Her Humiliation Conga in Season 7 could also be considered this
Large Ham: During the Nativity Play, as Mary.
Looking for Love in All the Wrong Places: Dates several men through a pen-pal service.
Mad Bomber: Put under her stalkee's fiancée's car.
Making Love in All the Wrong Places: In the prison shower and chapel with Nicky, and later in the visitor's room (against a vending machine, no less!) with Vinnie. Justified because, well, she's in prison. The guards look the other way when she has sex with Vinnie, but only because it's their wedding night, and they've made an allowance for it just this once. Lorna ends up pregnant from her tryst with Vinnie in the prison lobby.
Manipulative Bitch: She sends her boyfriend to beat a man who's been sending her sexually harassing messages. At first we can think she's referring to a creep that has visited her earlier and fits the description, but it turns out to be yes, you guessed it, Christopher. Vince had no idea he attacked an innocent man, much less that is was his girlfriend earlier stalkee whose car she'd bombed. Then again, it's unclear if it was calculation or the product of a next delusion from Lorna's side.
Nightmare Fuel Station Attendant: At first, she looks like sexy comic relief with a funny accent. But then there's the scene in which she goes to Christopher's house while he's out, and takes a bath wearing his fiancée's wedding veil. Yes, it's horrifying as it sounds.
OOC Is Serious Business: During, a phone call with her sister, wherein it is revealed that her "fiancé" Christopher is getting married to another woman nearby, her usually sweet, high-pitched, and chipper voice drops into a harsh, lower register as she threatens to choke her romantic rival. What makes the situation even more serious is that it's likely a psychotic episode brought on by Christopher's marriage, considering she is in fact a dangerous and highly delusional stalker, and was never married to Christopher-or even dating him—in the first place. Also after Nicky is sent to Max. While previously cheerful, well-groomed, and well-made up all series, she completely forgoes all makeup and hair care for a few episodes after Nicky is sent away because she can't stop crying. It's a testament to how much Nicky meant to her and how utterly dismayed she is that she's gone.
Opposites Attract: Aside from both being goofy, on paper she and Nicky have next to nothing in common. Their upbringings and world views clash in almost every way.
Outliving One's Offspring: Her newborn son dies of pneumonia in Season 7. Whatever minor fragments of Lorna's sanity were still there promptly vanish and she becomes completely insane as a result of the grief, insisting he's still alive.
Politically Incorrect Hero: Despite being one of the most genuinely sweet people in the prison, she is pretty casually racist and only seems to interact with other white inmates. She does have very sweet moments with Suzanne (black) and Rosa (Latina), though. The final season also shows her to be Islamophobic, viewing middle-eastern immigrants as terrorists, and xenophobic towards immigrants in general.
Psychopathic Manchild: While her idealism about romance and sometimes child-like attitude seem like just personal quirks in S1, S2 makes apparent, that Lorna is in some aspects mentally stunted at being a teenage girl capable of going to a very, very extreme lengths to land herself a fairy-tale prince.
Reluctant Psycho: When Christopher visits the prison to tell her that he'll kill her if she ever comes near his family again, she admits to Nicky that there is something really wrong with her.
Right for the Wrong Reasons: When Christopher comes to see her in prison and furiously calls her out on her stalking behavior, she is distraught and berates herself for Loving a Shadow. While she is correct in saying he's not the man she thought he was, she says so because she believes that he cruelly yelled at her for no reason, not because he's frustrated that she stalked and harassed him for months/years, tried to kill his real fiancée in the past, and broke into his house and vandalized his and his new bride's stuff from prison. Justified in that she is certifiably delusional regarding their relationship, but still.
Seemingly Wholesome '50s Girl: Invoked; Morello's lipstick and hairstyle call to mind the Fifties, but (unfortunately) so do her attitudes towards other races (thanks to West Side Story, of which she is enamored).
Situational Sexuality: She's ostensibly straight, and is consumed with fantasies about a fairy tale relationship that culminates in a perfect handsome husband with a litter of children around her ankles in a suburban paradise. She's also has sex with Nicky while in prison initially, though she breaks it off in time.
Stalker with a Crush: It turns out this is the extent of her relationship with Christopher. They went on one date, and she started stalking him and, eventually getting sent to jail for planting a bomb under his actual fiancée's car.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The sweet, cheerful, always dolled up Girly Girl to Nicky's loudmouthed, snarky Tomboy.
Troubled Fetal Position: Lorna's last scene in the series is her lying in this pose on Red's lap as Red sings to her and strokes her hair with Lorna even sucking her thumb for good measure.
Troubling Unchildlike Behavior: When she was making her First Communion (so about 7-8 years old), she refused to consume the Communion wafer because it was bread, and she was concerned that bread would make her fat.
What the Hell, Hero?: In Season 5, she convinces Suzanne and all the other inmates that their psychological problems can be handled by the brain and willpower, and refuses to give any of them their medications. We don't see how this effects the population at large, but Suzanne starts freaking out more and more the longer she's off her meds. Of course, Lorna is mentally ill too, so how much she can be held responsible for those actions is up for a discussion.
White-Collar Crime: Morello scammed mail-order companies (but it's possible that she didn't even get caught on it, as she was also tried for setting a bomb under someone's car).
Wide-Eyed Idealist: Or the closest she can get in prison, believing her fiancé will stick around despite him having only visited her once. However, in reality, she was never engaged at all and is actually a crazy stalker.
Yandere: A scary but still tragic one.