Added Alliterative Appeal: Nicky is a sparky and funny person (when she's not on drugs), with three alliterative names.
Blatant Lies: When Red offers to help her detox again, Nicky brushes her off, blithely stating she's already decided to quit cold turkey, she's already gone through the vomiting stage, and she's decided to just keep busy (with crossword puzzles and shit) to keep her mind off drugs. She then briskly walks to her dealers for more.
The Bus Came Back: In Season 4, she gets released from maximum security and returned to the prison proper.
Butch Lesbian: Zig-zagged. She's not very feminine in personality nor appearance—has wild hair and isn't overly concerned with personal appearance—but thanks to being played by Natasha Lyonne, she still has natural good looks and has no problem attracting the likes of Morello.
The Casanova: Female version. She even enters a competition with Big Boo to see who can have sex with the most women, and Nicky comes close to winning before they declare a tie.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: To Lorna in her more delusional/unstable moments.
Creepy Uncle: She refers to her Uncle Pete as one.
Dark and Troubled Past: Nicky spent her entire childhood in a separate house from her parents, raised exclusively by her nanny and ignored by her wealthy socialite mother. She became a drug addict as a teenager, eventually leading to a near-fatal bout of endocarditis, and had to go through a hellish detox period when she was sent to prison. She's been to rehab at least seven times. In season 6, Nicky makes a comment about going to her "Uncle Pete's" house and mentions some "bad touching", implying she was sexually abused by him.
Deadpan Snarker: Nicky is probably the most brutally and wonderfully sarcastic character on the whole show. Only Big Boo comes close.
(On the SHU)"It's like the Hamptons, only fuckin' horrible."
"I'd made a terrible mule. I would've done all of your drugs."
"I'm like Icarus, whose wings melted before he could fuck the sun."
Dramatic Irony: After spending three months in Max and three years clean, the audience sees Nicky finally gives into her temptation to take heroin again right after Judy King arranges to have her moved back to minimum security.
Drugs Are Bad: Heroin has seriously messed up her life.
The Hedonist: Nicky is strongly motivated by enjoyment, which she divides between sex and, primarily, drugs.
The Gadfly: Frequently trolls Piper and Alex (mostly Piper, as she is more receptive to being baited) to gain information on their past.
Nicky: She said you were a squirter.
Piper: I don't—that's-once! It happened once! It took us both by surprise!
Nicky: Wow! I was kidding, but good to know!
Friends with Benefits: With Morello, though Morello later cuts off the benefits. She later has a brief fling with Brook Soso. While in Max, she forms an equally brief relationship with Stella Carlin which Nicky herself ends due to Stella's continuing drug habit.
Hopeless Suitor: To Lorna, romantically if not sexually. In season 5 she even pulls a I Want My Beloved to Be Happy by helping Lorna to reconcile with her husband.
It's All About Me: Whenever she's hooked on heroin, she'll do whatever it takes to get her fix. Flashback episodes show that she's willing to lie, use, and abandon anyone and everyone just to get her next hit. (For example, she let a friend get arrested for their collective delinquent behavior, asked her mom to borrow a few hundred dollars to bail him out, spent the bail money on heroin instead, then told him over the phone that she couldn't get the bail money while smoking the heroin she spent his bail money on.) In Season 4, several characters call her out on caring more about heroin than them.
The Lad-ette: She has a personality of a frat boy and happily engages in such activities as banging contests.
Lonely Rich Kid: In her backstory. Nicky had lots of (junkie) friends, but a void seems to have been left by the neglect of her mother.
Messy Hair: Nicky's hair is unruly and wild… always. Until her makeover in Season 5.
Meta Casting: The scar on her chest? It's real. Natasha Lyonne really did have heart surgery a few years back, and it really was from a bacterial infection resulting from use of a dirty needle.
Mommy Issues: She hates her mother for choosing to live in a different home as she was growing up because her new husband didn't like kids. Nicky was subsequently raised by a nanny.
"I always miss you until you're here. Then I realize the mom I miss must have been someone I invented when I was a kid."
Nice Girl: Extremely caring and protective of her friends and anyone who is close to her.
Parental Neglect: Nicky was raised by a maid.
Princess in Rags: Apparently came from a wealthy family and used to travel the world. Alex comments that she would be exactly the kind of person she'd target.
Put on a Bus: Nicky is sent to maximum security after Luschek rats her out for drug possession. She returns in Season 4.
Rape as Drama: While in maximum security Nicky is raped by a female guard in exchange for heroin. Although Nicky technically consented to the act, the woman being a guard and using her addiction against her is clearly an abuse of power and legally considered rape.
Suddenly Sober: Despite detoxing just days before, very little is mentioned in Season 5 about her just coming down and she's hardly tempted at all, despite (or perhaps because of) the fact that a riot has broken out in the prison, a guard has been shot, and they're all likely to get more time on their sentences.
Those Two Girls: With Morello, initially.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The loudmouthed, snarky Tomboy to sweet, cheerful, always dolled up Girly Girl Lorna.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Spending months in Max and getting re-hooked on heroin did not help her temperament.
Wham Episode: "Empathy Is a Boner Killer", third episode of Season 3. Nicky gets ratted out for possession by Luschek and is sent to maximum security.