The Baroness: Rosa Klebb edition, as the sexless Russian powerhouse of the jail's kitchen—reconstructed prior to her incarceration, where she fails to make the connections with the Mafiya wives, but impresses the men with her cunning. Lampshaded in season 5, when Flores even calls her a "Bond villain".
The Cuckoolander Was Right: She was a little off her rocker in Season 5 due to taking a bunch of unprescribed behavioral meds, but her theory that Piscatella had broken into the prison and kidnapped her friends was correct!
Dark and Troubled Past: Red and her husband both wound up involved with the Russian Mafia while struggling to keep their small supermarket afloat, and eventually wound up in debt to them after Red lost her temper and punched a mobster's wife, rupturing her breast implant. When a guard's dismembered body turns up in the garden, Piscatella immediately suspects her - not because she was in charge of the garden, but because the police found five dismembered frozen corpses in her home.
A Day in the Limelight: "Tit Punch" which shows her backstory. "The Tightening" is another, showing her youth in Russia.
Death Glare: Known to have a look that "makes [people]'s ass leak".
Double Standard: Abuse, Female on Male: When one of her sons comes to visit with a black eye and swollen cheek, because his wife slocked him with a sock full of nickels, she brushes him off, saying he must have done something to deserve it. She frequently takes the side of her sons' wives/fiancées, no matter how terribly they treat her boys.
The Dreaded: No one wants to mess with Red.
Fiery Redhead: Her red hair matches her tough and domineering personality.
Good Scars, Evil Scars: She has one over her right cheek after being slocked by Vee in season 2.
Husky Russkie: Tough as nails and Russian.
Hoist by His Own Petard: Her scheme to get back the kitchen in the end of Season One literally backfired, causing Red's best friend to be set on fire.
How the Mighty Have Fallen: This is how Red's character arc ends by Season 7. When the show starts, she was the commander of the kitchen and even when she lost that, she was still the Team Mom who took shit from nobody due to Mother Russia Makes You Strong as well as being an officer of the Reznikov Mafiya. By season 7, she's gone into full blown dementia that she's lost track of time, even calling for people who have died in previous seasons like Tricia. Even when she recognizes Frieda as the woman who sold her out, she forgets about it soon enough.
Humiliation Conga: She has her status as head of kitchen revoked after Pornstache leaks her smuggling operation to the prison administrators. Made worse when the food under Gloria, the new Latina head of kitchen, turns out to be delicious. Red attempts to sabotage the kitchen operation in her absence but ends up accidentally burning Gina and losing Norma's trust. Finally she loses her food privileges in the same way as she subjected Chapman at the beginning of the series.
Hypocritical Humour: Twice in one piece of dialogue. Firstly she tells Piper not to be racist, and instantly says all black inmates are on heroin. Then she says that all Spanish are crazy and superstitious before stating that she wants to eat the smartest chicken to absorb its power.
"Those Spanish probably won't even eat it, just cut her throat and drink her blood, or something else superstitious. All I wanted was to eat the chicken that is smarter than other chickens and to absorb its power. And make a nice Kiev."
I Did What I Had to Do: When Healy gets mad at her for pretending to be into him in order to get extra prison favors, she retorts that as a prison counselor and prisoner he has all the power while she has none, and she's not ashamed to use whatever means she has to to stay afloat in there.
I Have No Son!: She cuts off her old prison family when they throw her under the bus, Frieda included, by saying she was the one who had the bunker. Especially Frieda so she could get into Florida.
Important Haircut: In season 6 she gets her previous semi scalping by Piscatella fixed into a blonde and grey do with only the red tips remaining, signifying her joining up with Carol's posse.
Iron Lady: Outwardly tough and intimidating, but to those she cares about, she shows a more caring and vulnerable self.
I Was Quite a Looker: Red says she was once quite attractive, and laments the effects that age has on her looks. Flashbacks reveal she was indeed quite a pretty young woman.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She might be a very stern woman, but she takes care of her underlings, helps junkies beat their addiction, and is distraught at the death of Tricia.
The Mafiya: Ironically, she and her husband were initially forced to help the mob carry out errands to repay a debt, but she eventually proves herself to be a very shrewd and cunning criminal and becomes a respected member of the organization in her own right.
Meaningful Name: Her real last name, Reznikov(a), is of Jewish origin and is essentially the Russian translation of "Kosher Butcher". It makes sense she'd be running the kitchen.
The Mentor: She plays this role for Piper of all people, after becoming her bunk-mate in season two.
Mother Russia Makes You Strong: Mentally more than physically. Growing up in a Communist regime does that.
Mugging the Monster: Gone Horribly Right, when Red lures Piscatella into the prison. He kidnaps her and her family one by one, locks them up and proceeds to torture them. They're only saved by the sheer miracle of Frieda having a secret bunker under the room Piscatella chooses.
My God, What Have I Done?: She's distraught after Tricia is found hanged, believing she drove her to suicide.
No-Holds-Barred Beatdown: She winds up on the receiving end from two of them in Season 2, both at the behest of Vee.
Odd Friendship: She bonds with Flores in season 5 while looking for dirt on Piscatella.
Only Known by Their Nickname: She's known as 'Red' to both staff and inmates.
Parental Substitute: For Nicky, who calls her "Mama", "Mommy" and when Piper admits confusion, flat-out says she sees Red as "a mother figure", as she's estranged from her own mother.
Poor Communication Kills:
Poor Tricia. Red didn't help her hide her withdrawal symptoms because she hoped the prison would launch an investigation to root all drugs out of the prison, and turned her back on Tricia after she got out of SHU just to teach her a lesson. Unfortunately, she didn't tell Nicky or Tricia this, which leads to Nicky telling Mendez how Red smuggles in contraband out of spite, which leads to Mendez strong-arming Red into including drugs and Tricia into taking them, which leads to Tricia overdosing and dying.
In Season 6, her unnecessarily vague message about the "tall one" being killed leads Piper to assume she means Alex is dead (Red meant Piscatella), leading to Piper abandoning Red.
Power Hair: Red has bright... red spiky hair to go along with her tough, not-to-be-messed-with attitude.
Revenge Before Reason: In season 6 she had the chance to finally see her grandkids in visitation, but soon as she passes by Frieda who had come from testifying in Taystee's trial, she strangles her and gets thrown into the SHU for the rest of the season.
The Rival: She's one to Vee for control of the prison in Season 2.
Scars Are Forever: After the slocking she gets from Vee, Red now has one on her right cheek.
Scatterbrained Senior: She develops dementia in Season 7, partially triggered by her time in the SHU.
Supreme Chef: Not while in the prison—most of the inmates seem agreed that Gloria's food is better—but outside she apparently made some pretty good Russian food.
Team Mom: A very stern example, but Red serves as a distinctly maternal figure who straightens out and regulates the behavior of several girls by taking them under her wing.
Too Dumb to Live: The general and very well-justified opinion of other inmates in season 5 when Red decides to lure Pistacella into the prison. And succeeds.
Took a Level in Dumbass: She has always been one of the most intelligent characters, until season 5 and 6 where she makes quite a few stupid decisions, bordering on Too Dumb to Live. Deconstructed in season 7, as she is suffering from dementia.
Traumatic Haircut: She receives one from Piscatella in season 5, with patches of flesh carved off as well.