Abhorrent Admirer: To Piper, who considers him a Yandere but his feelings toward Piper (be they romantic, lustful or even fatherly) are somewhat ambiguous. Downplayed in Season 2, where his attention towards Piper seems more or less geared towards him wanting to make a difference.
Age-Gap Romance: Seeing his wife and her mother at the table, you are excused to think for a moment, that this is Healy with his wife and daughter, not mother-in-law and wife.
All Love Is Unrequited: His (maybe) crush on Piper in the first season is definitely not reciprocated. He clearly loves his Mail-Order Bride as well, but she can barely stand him. He develops a crush on Red in the third season, but she recognizes that a relationship between prison staff and a prison inmate can never be truly consensual.
Anti-Villain: From Seasons 2 onward.
The Atoner: In Season 2, Healy begins to make genuine attempts to become a better person. He's such an inherently twisted person, however, that he finds this difficult and the process usually ends up being two steps forward and one step back. Still, he gets points for trying.
Big Bad Duumvirate: With Pennsatucky in the first season. In the second season, he begins settle down a little in terms of his evil-doings.
Berserk Button: Homosexuality, specifically lesbians.
Butt-Monkey: None of the inmates (besides Pennsatucky) like him, he is mocked in a comic in the prison newsletter and never even catches on it, and neither Caputo nor Figueroa seem to have much patience for his "lesbian witch hunt."
Character Development: In a The Bus Came Back moment in Season 6, Healy has become an Anti-Nihilist, and encourages Caputo to simply accept the disappointments and frustrations in life and find happiness.
Conspiracy Theorist: It's eventually (and hilariously) revealed that the reason behind Healy's hatred for lesbians is that he believes there's a growing conspiracy in which lesbians take over the world through the use of genetically engineered test-tube babies, resulting in the extinction of men.
The Cynic: Healy may have a conscience buried somewhere deep inside, but he is so jaded and unhappy that he has lost sight of right and wrong.
Dark and Troubled Past: His childhood home life. Healy's mother suffered from some kind of delusions. She was abusive and neglectful in turns.
Disproportionate Retribution: He throws Piper in the SHU for simply dancing with Alex. Even Mendez thinks it's over-kill, although Mendez's objection probably had other reasons as well.
Evil All Along: Healy's mild affability can make him come across as rather likable, but gradually it becomes clear that he's a deeply vindictive man who's excellent at holding a grudge. However, he realizes this and tries to make amends later, going to great length to help Lolly.
Evil Is Petty:
He throws Piper in the SHU just for dancing with Alex, albeit in a suggestive fashion.
In the first season's finale he's willing to let Piper die just because she has outsmarted him and caused him getting chewed out by Figueroa.
He gets Rogers suspended mostly because he is jealous of her being the better counselor.
Faux Affably Evil: At the beginning of Season 1, Healy comes across as a genuinely good-natured man who is looking out for Piper, albeit one who was somewhat incompetent and who happens to have a weird fixation on lesbians. Over the course of the first season, he loses this mask.
Freudian Excuse: Flashbacks to his childhood show that his mother was terrifyingly unstable, which would explain why he prefers to be around women he can control. A season four episode reveals that he hates lesbianism because when he asked his dad what a lesbian was as a kid, his dad said it was a mental disease not unlike what his mother had.
Green-Eyed Monster: The biggest reason why he hates Rogers so much is that she proves to be a better counselor, and that the inmates like her much more than him.
Hair-Trigger Temper: Healy has anger issues stemming from his own discomfort with the world around him, his empty social life, and feelings of impotency at his job. He eventually ends up bonding with Pennsatucky over their mutual anger issues.
Happiness in Minimum Wage: His final appearance on the show has him working at a smoothie place, under a manager who is at least three or four decades younger than him, but having become much more well-adjusted and finally taking steps to deal with his issues and overall a lot happier.
Heel–Face Turn: He undergoes this in stages, but a watershed moment for him is when he lies to protect Suzanne in Season 2, and after he comes to understand some of his more manipulative behaviour in Season 3, he devotes himself to trying to help Lolly.
Heroic BSoD: Has one after he realizes that Lolly was telling the truth when she confessed to murdering someone. He first tries suicide, then decides to send Lolly to psych and check into a psych hospital.
Heteronormative Crusader: He has a strong distaste for lesbians (and implicitly, homosexuality in general) and makes it something of a mission to steer inmates away from lesbianism.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: Finally comes around to this for his wife at the end of Season 3. After spending most of the series trying to make her behave how he wants by holding over her head that he pays for everything, he agrees to help her move into an apartment with her mother so she will no longer feel like she's in a cage.
Mail-Order Bride: His wife is one, and she's very clearly not into him. Healy seems to be in love with her, however, and is even learning Russian to try and communicate better with her.
Mommy Issues: Healy has severe issues with his mother, who suffered from mental illness throughout her life before abandoning him. He still feels guilty for not helping her more when she was seemingly reaching out to him as a child.
My Greatest Failure: His inability to help his mother when she tried to reach out to him about her illness, which (he feels) prompted her to run away. He goes through this again when he has Lolly sent to Psyche, feeling like he failed to help his mother all over again.
No Social Skills: Even when he is meaning well, he usually just can't communicate right with others, ruining his efforts. It's not helped by his own bad temper and tendency to take any slight extremely personally and hold on to grudges like they're his newborn children.
Not-So-Harmless Villain: He seems rather kindly, if incompetent and weird, until "Fucksgiving" when he loses his top and manages to intimidate Pornstache, of all people. It's a little tough to determine exactly where Healy goes from being goofy and ignorant to dangerous and hateful, but it's clear that by the last scene of the first season, where he ignores Chapman's cries for help and leaves her to a fight with Pennsatucky that he knows will likely be fatal, he's definitely crossed the Moral Event Horizon.
Pet the Dog: Many times:
Protecting Suzanne by forging a document at the end of Season 2 after realizing she's innocent.
Giving Red the kitchen back even after her "Reason You Suck" Speech in Season 3.
Taking care of Lolly in Season 4.
Politically Incorrect Villain: He's quite openly homophobic, even other staff members in the prison call him out and tell him to see a therapist about this. Other than that he is noticeably classist, possibly slightly racist and has more than a healthy dose of a Strawman Political in him.
Put on a Bus: At the end of Season 4, he checks himself into a psychiatric hospital.
Rejected Apology: Does this a lot. Healy is very easily offended, and once he feels he's slighted, he will hold a grudge forever. A few inmates who unwittingly lose favor with him over the series try profusely to apologize, only for him to brush them off.
Took a Level in Kindness: In the second season, Healy works on getting more in tune with his feelings and earning back the inmates' trust, with the help of a (very patient) therapist. In the Season 2 finale, he lies to help Suzanne. In Season 4, he takes another level in his treatment of Lolly. In his final appearance in Season 7, he's taken a few more since leaving the prison and is now much happier and in a better place.
Tragic Villain: His flashbacks go a long way to explaining how he became such a woman-hating freak, and engenders some sympathy for him.
Villainous Crush: Piper thinks he has this for her, and she may be right but his actions could be interpreted in other ways. Be it sexual, romantic or fatherly feelings, Healy seems to think of her as of a well-mannered blond, WASP-y, straight feminine ideal, and that's why he is even heart-broken when he hears about and witness her suggestive dancing with Alex.
He develops one for Red in Season 3, when she talks him up for his wife. When he finds out she was just pretending to get extra favors from him, he's just as mad at her as he was to Piper. Unfortunately for Healy, Red is not as much of a pushover as Piper.
Yandere: Fixates on Piper to the point of sending her to solitary for dancing with another girl in a perfect storm of his obsession with her and his broader 'lesbian witch-hunt issues'. It's toned down in Season 2, where they don't spend as much time together.