Almighty Janitor: Has one of the most unassuming jobs in Springfield, yet he's one of its smartest, most resourceful citizens.
Asian Store-Owner: Indian, specifically.
Beta Couple: With Manjula to Homer and Marge in later seasons.
Beware the Nice Ones: Is normally friendly and genial, but has shown himself capable of both considerable strength and intense rage.
Big Beautiful Man: Is one of the many male Springfielders to have a noticeable gut, but unlike most of them he's considered a Chick Magnet who was briefly the most eligible bachelor in town before he got married.
Bollywood Nerd: Doesn't come up a lot, but he graduated as top of his class in computer science at Cal Tech (Calcutta Tech)—a class of 7 million.
Breakout Character: Apu initially started off as a comparatively minor character, but eventually got multiple focus episodes and is now one of the most prominent supporting characters. It got to the point where Apu became a playable character - the only non-Simpson of the five characters in-game - in Hit and Run.
But for Me, It Was Tuesday: How he see's being held up at gun point and occasionally shot, all just part of the job. He even has former robbers he likes due to the personal way they handled the robberies (waiting with him while the ambulance gets there, using nylon ropes) such as Snake, Sideshow Bob or Jack Crowley.
Catchphrase:
"Thank you, come again!" (even to store robbers!)
"I can't believe you don't shut up!"
Chick Magnet: Apu enjoyed a reign as Springfield's most eligible bachelor — until he got married.
Cool Car: Drives a '79 Pontiac Trans Am that could only be described as bitchin'.
Determinator:
In one early episode, Apu says that the town government should hire more police officers, since he'd been shot 8 times that year. As a result, he almost missed work. Almost.
And then there was the time when he managed to work a 96-hour shift without having a break. It ended when he started thinking he was a hummingbird and tried to drink nectar out of his brother's head.
Do Wrong, Right: Official Kwik-E-Mart policy to selling bad food. Sell gone-off food if you will, but have a scapegoat handy.
Eternal Employee: Apu is almost always seen working at the Kwik-E-Mart. He's so dedicated, he once worked a 96-hour shift without a single break.
Everyone Has Standards: Is normally lax towards safety standards, but sometimes, both out of self-interest and genuine concern for his fellow Springfielders, he draws a line. For example, in The Simpsons Hit & Run, he is shocked that he has been selling Buzz Cola once its true nature is revealed.
Flanderization: He went from an impossibly cheap shopkeeper who couldn't care less for his customers into a hard-working, intensely patriotic immigrant. After Manjula was herself Flanderized into an extreme nag, Apu somewhat relapsed into his old "dishonest salesman" traits while his workaholic tendencies were ret-conned into an excuse for him to stay away from home at any costs.
Funny Foreigner: When the show needs an Indian stereotype joke.
The Gambling Addict: In "Much Apu About Something", it is revealed he has sold most of his stake in the store to Sanjay to cultivate his addiction to scratch-and-win cards.
Hidden Depths: Graduated top of his class of 7 million in Computer Science at Calcutta Technical Institute and originally came to America to study for his Ph.D. in the subject, which he did successfully; he only works as a convenience store clerk because he genuinely loves that job. An early episode also showed that he was a volunteer fireman.
Immigrant Patriotism: He started his stay in America as an illegal immigrant, though he later passed his citizenship exam and was officially recognised as a legitimate Indian American.
Lisa: You know, Apu, in a way, all Americans are immigrants, except Native Americans.
Homer: Yeah. Native Americans like us.
Lisa: No, I mean American Indians.
Apu: Like me.
Made of Iron: Has been shot so many times that when he was shot saving James Woods, the bullet ricocheted off another bullet that had previously been lodged there.
Manipulative Bastard: One Season 4 episode shows Apu curries Homer's favour in order to stop him going to the much cheaper store next door.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: Hank Azaria reportedly based his voice on Peter Sellers' Indian character in The Party.
Out of Focus: From season 27 onwards, he has begun to appear much less frequently, and rarely serves as anything more than a non-speaking background character on the occasions when he does. This is a case of Real Life Writes the Plot due to the growing complaints directed at his character for being a racial stereotype, as well as Hank Azaria intentionally stepping away from the role. He is also one of the two characters (alongside Cookie Kwan, herself an Asian stereotype) to not be recast with an actor of color by Season 32, adding to his absence. Eventually he stopped appearing altogether and is presumably Put on a Bus.
Perfectly Arranged Marriage: While their marriage is far from perfect (the stresses of raising eight kids and Apu's infidelity), Apu and Manjula got off to a great start and do love each other. While many fans worry that this has been subverted, as some bitterness still remains, later episodes suggest they worked it out.
Promotion to Opening Titles: He gets added to the intro in Season 2, as Bart skates past him.
Rant Comedy: Occasionally slips into this, such as when Principal Skinner inadvertently ripped off Jurassic Park in his book concept. It's implied that Apu lectured Skinner on this for at least several minutes.
Apu: Oh, you have got to be kidding, sir. First you think of an idea that has already been done, and then you give it a title that nobody could possibly like! Didn't you think this...
[fade cut]
Apu: [more agitated] ...on the bestseller list for 18 months! Every magazine cover had it...
[fade cut]
Apu: ...most popular movies of all time, sir! WHAT WERE YOU THINKING?! ...I mean, thank you, come again.
Sanity Ball: A common holder. While he can be just as vulnerable to the wackiness of Springfield as most, he has a self-awareness and common sense that means he is usually one of the sanest in the room.
Shout-Out: His name is one for Satyajit Ray's The Apu Trilogy.
Sixth Ranger: Was this to the main Simpsons family in The Simpsons Hit & Run. Additionally, if the show needs Homer to have a friend outside of his regular drinking circle, Apu will be a likely candidate.
Stereotypical South Asian English: His accent is sing-song, his speech can get verbose, and he often mentions Hindu gods.
Super-Stoic Shopkeeper: Can show signs of this at times, as part of his personality as the Determinator.
Took a Level in Kindness: After getting fired from the Kwik-E-Mart in "Homer and Apu", Apu takes the time to make amends and learned to be a better person and had a change of heart.
Too Many Babies: When he and Manjula could not conceive a child, they underwent IVF and Manjula had octuplets. It also helped that Apu, Homer, Marge and Bart were each slipping her fertility drugs.
Workaholic: His devotion to his work is paramount.