Acrofatic: He looks just as fat as Homer, but he frequently performs acrobatic tricks and flips during his shows.
Alter Kocker: Is either on his way to this trope or already there, Depending on the Writer.
Brilliant, but Lazy: He's capable of brilliant physical comedy and has demonstrated a knack for subversive humor. He even used to be a thoughtful and incisive interviewer. It's just that he became used to the trappings of fame over the years and prefers making loads of cash by licensing his name and likeness.
Butt-Monkey: Despite being a celebrity (although how big of one he is depends on the writer; see below), if Krusty's backstory is anything to go by, he often found himself the victims of Disproportionate Retribution and George Jetson Job Security. Such cases include being fired for 22 years just because a pair of stage shutters wouldn't open, pissing him off and making him start using language that wasn't acceptable on TV at the time, or getting his bus pass revoked for drinking a soda.
Catchphrase:
"Hey hey, kids!" or "Hey, hey" followed by his goofy laugh.
There's also "Uuuuggggh", for when his jokes don't land. Which unfortunately is often.
Character Development: In "Krusty Gets Busted", he admits that, despite promoting children's literacy, he's illiterate himself (which was also a telltale sign of his innocence). Later episodes would show that he'd since become at least semi-literate.
Conspicuous Consumption: From lighting cigars with $100 bills to buying a new house because the old one is dirty.
Crazy-Prepared: When he's informed about the invasion of the Falkland Islands, he immediately pulls down a map and begins explaining the situation to the audience.
Critic-Proof: An In-Universe example. When Krusty first debuted, the reviewers said he wouldn't last a week. More recently, he says that there's no way he could win an Emmy, since the Academy hates him and it's mentioned multiple times that he steals jokes and has nothing above kid's entertainment material. None of this stops Krusty from having a massive fanbase and hosting the number one children's show in America.
Cry Laughing: Switches between laughing and crying after he reveals he's bipolar.
The Cynic: He's always pessimistic about everything when he's not on the air.
Deadpan Snarker: He's this when he's not performing.
Denser and Wackier: An In-Universe example occurs with Krusty's show. In the early '60s, Krusty started out hosting a serious political discussion show, featuring guests such as AFL-CIO chairman George Meany. Later, the show started to become sillier (Robert Frost appeared as a serious guest, but Krusty dumped a load of snow on him), until it became the full-fledged kiddie show people know and love today.
Depending on the Writer:
The show flip-flops on whether or not his pure white face is make-up or not (and if it's not, what exactly causes it also varies) and whether or not he can read.
Also depending on the writer is whether he is a local celebrity known only around Springfield or he is a media mogul with a national following and friends among the A list.
His personality tends to shift based on the level of focus he's getting. In general, if Krusty is a major character in an episode, he'll be a Jerk with a Heart of Gold who, for all his vices, really does care about entertaining people and more often than not shows a good side. If he's not a major character, you can count on his vices to be his entire character, with no sign of any redeeming qualities.
Depraved Kids' Show Host: Due to his Freudian Excuse.
Did I Just Say That Out Loud?:
"Let's just say [Burns' film] moved me... TO A BIGGER HOUSE!"
"Uh oh, I said the quiet part loud and the loud part quiet."
Dirty Old Man: Krusty loves pornography and has had multiple flings with much younger women. Apu gives Homer (dressed as Krusty) a 5% discount off anything in store because Apu considers Krusty's predilection for pornographic magazines to have been key for establishing himself in the first year of running his store. He's also sexually harassed at least one woman to the point where the courts appointed "Ms. 'No Means No'" as a new sidekick to warn him whenever he goes too far...and Krusty immediately began to hit on her.
Dub Name Change: While the show airs subtitled in Finland, and most of the original names for recurring characters are retained, he has been renamed "Hassu-klovni" (Funny the Clown), which is somewhat unusualnote . This also applies to his brand, with Krustyburger becoming "Hassupurilainen", for example.
Early Installment Character-Design Difference: His Tracey Ullman shorts depiction had dark blue hair instead of turquoise, an orange mouth instead of brown, a green shirt instead of purple, pink pants instead of green and a purple bowtie instead of blue.
Early-Installment Weirdness: His debut in the Tracey Ullman short "The Krusty the Clown Show" depicts him as an actor in costume and makeup, in stark contrast to several episodes in the series later implying that's how he actually looks (though Krusty being an ordinary man in makeup was also the case in the season one episode "Krusty Gets Busted"). In addition, the short gave some clear hints that he and Homer Simpson are the same person (e.g. Krusty strangling Bart while exclaiming "Why, you little..." after Bart removed his clown nose, the short ending with Homer saying "D'oh!" after watching the incident unfold on television), which is at odds with the show clearly demonstrating on multiple occasions that Krusty and Homer are two different people.
The Eeyore: Widely adored by almost every child in Springfield, yet continues to have an apathetic outlook on life.
Everyone Has Standards:
He found no humor in the prospect of Apu cheating on his wife when he has a ton of kids.
Shameless sellout he may be, but even he is horrified by the conditions the kids were forced to live in at Kamp Krusty and makes it up to them by taking them on a trip to Tijuana.
Expressive Hair: In the early seasons, Krusty's hair would rise and fall depending on his emotions. This detail, however, seems to have slowly faded away in later seasons.
Fat Bastard: He's got the same portly belly as Homer, and is quite apathetic when the camera's not on him.
Flanderization: He went from being a cheery and fun-loving children's entertainer who loved having the camera on him to a weary and cynical old showbiz figure with a heart of gold, to a greedy and shameless sellout. Plus the later seasons show Krusty doing enough drugs to make the movie version of Jordan Belfort proud (he was originally just a chain smoker). This might have something to do with how he actually was originally Homer himself in disguise - note their appearances - something that was abandoned early.
A Fool and His New Money Are Soon Parted:
Thanks to the fluid nature of the show, Krusty has a weird budget and net worth. In some episodes, he's only a locally known kids' show host and he hardly has any money, and in other episodes he's a media empire on par with Disney.
Inconsistencies aside, it's heavily implied that Krusty's Conspicuous Consumption, lawsuits resulting from his Plagiarism in Fiction and No Product Safety Standards and his massive gambling debts mean he constantly squanders his money as fast as he earns it.
Freudian Excuse: As a child, his father, Hyman Krustofsky, who's extremely devoted to the Jewish faith and also the town rabbi, had disapproved of young Herschel's goal to become a world-famous comedian. Even after making up after 25 years, he still remains a bitter individual.
The Gambling Addict: He has such a problem frittering away money on ridiculous bets that he makes a wager against the Harlem Globetrotters. This ends up incurring the wrath of The Mafia.
Genre Shift: In-universe.
"Bart Of Darkness" reveals that Krusty originally hosted a show on politics in the early 60s. He regards that a step down from where he currently is.
When he realizes that his material and persona are growing stale in "The Last Temptation of Krust", Krusty reinvents himself as a more adult-oriented social-comic. He's able to find a lot of success by channeling his bitterness and cynicism into social commentary, though by the episode's end he chooses the corporate-sponsored lifestyle over his rebellious-though-not-as-well-paying persona.
As revealed in "The Ten-Per-Cent Solution", he actually started out as a serious and well-respected stand-up comedian before his agent convinced him that cheap laughs payed more.
Germans Love David Hasselhoff:
An In-Universe example. Krusty is widely beloved in America, but he's also revered by the French à la Jerry Lewis.
Also inverted, as when Krusty sold the rights to usage of his likeness to the international market, every foreign version of Krusty ended up becoming more popular than him. The original Krusty the Clown was the least popular version of Krusty the Clown.
Grandfather Clause: He's the host of a local TV kids' show, something that was already dying out when the series began and became totally moribund through The Simpsons' run.
Hates the Job, Loves the Limelight: He hates being a clown, but loves the attention so much that he keeps doing his act for a living. He was such a hard-core version of this Trope (even before Flanderization kicked in) that he used to be the Trope Namer.
The Hyena: He has a very hard time staying serious during an interview with Kent Brockman; he is issued a First-Name Ultimatum.
Identical Stranger: Krusty heavily resembles Homer in clown makeup. This is a plot point in "Homie the Clown", where Homer becomes a Krusty impersonator and no one in Springfield can tell them apart. In the episode "Fears of a Clown", Krusty struggles with a heavy bout of depression and stops putting on his clown makeup, making his resemblance to Homer even more obvious and uncanny, so much so that Homer himself comments on it. In fact, Krusty originally was supposed to be Homer's clown persona, but this idea was ultimately scrapped.
Internalized Categorism: He characterizes himself as a "self-hating Jew", possibly due to his rejection of his father's strict Orthodoxy.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: On his worse moments, he's a Mean Boss who constantly belittles his co-workers, tends to be an Ungrateful Bastard who completely forgets all the good things Bart has done for him. On his better days, however, he'll do what it takes to help other people (though oftentimes provided he has some gain), and he's shown to at least have some heart for the kids he makes laugh despite his comments towards them.
Krusty: (after hearing the pain the kids went through at Kamp Krusty) Well, I'm gonna make it all up to you. I'm gonna show you kids the time of your life.
"Just Joking" Justification: When the Simpsons look horrified when he says he can have somebody whacked if you pay him a thousand dollars, he responds with "When you give me that look, it's a joke."
Mean Boss: His poor treatment towards Sideshow Bob is the reason for Bob's attempt to frame him and kill him in other episodes. His successor Sideshow Mel and Mr. Teeny are treated similarly by Krusty. This might be why the opening of "Round Springfield" shows him to be The Friend Nobody Likes.
Money Dumb: Krusty's made millions of dollars during his career. Unfortunately, he's also found all kinds of ways to waste it: lighting his cigarettes with everything from hundred-dollar bills to strings of pearls to copies of Action Comics #1; eating omelets made from rare condor eggs; sending roses to Bea Arthur's grave even when she was still alive; buying a ruby-studded clown nose; hiring Kenny G to play for him in his elevator; buying a new house because his old one is dirty; buying pornographic magazines (which Apu says kept him in business during his first year); settling lawsuits other comedians launch when he steals their material; and gambling on everything from horse races to sporting events to operas. His spending problems are so bad that he's nearly bankrupted himself more than once.
Monster Clown: Krusty has the uncanny ability to sometimes cause heart attacks in people with pacemakers. He even has one himself (which is why his face is so pale, though a lot of past episodes imply that his white makeup is just makeup and, in one case, can be genetically passed note ). One Treehouse of Horror episode had him show his audience what he would look like in HD. It wasn't pretty. All that being said, unlike most examples of this trope, Krusty isn't evil at all, just a deeply cynical, broken and mentally ill Jerk with a Heart of Gold. The real Monster Clown is his Evil Former Friend Sideshow Bob.
Mood-Swinger: He goes from cheerful and goofy to sassy and cynical at the drop of a hat.
Morality Chain: Despite his trouble remembering him, Bart can sometimes be played as this.
Multiple Demographic Appeal: An In-Universe example. The Krusty The Klown Show is enjoyed by children, but many adults like Homer also enjoy it.
Nice Character, Mean Actor: "When I'm off the clock, kids can go jump in a lake for all I care."
No Celebrities Were Harmed: Krusty is a Composite Character of many real-life celebrities:
Matt Groening based him most directly on Portland-area children's entertainer Rusty Nails (real name James Allen), whom he regularly watched growing up and knew slightly as an adult. Groening recalls that Rusty was a "sweet clown" and a nice guy in Real Life unlike Krusty, but Groening was disturbed by the character's odd name as a child which gave him the idea for a clown who's much less kid-friendly than he first appears.
Krusty's act and personal history also draws a lot from famous real-life clowns like Bozo (with Dan Castellaneta's vocal performance an homage to the original Bozo, Bob Bell), Pinky Lee (who like Krusty once collapsed on live television)note  and Soupy Sales, who notoriously asked children to steal money from their parents and send it to him (an incident referenced several times on the show).
Krusty derives other traits from Jerry Lewis (Krusty's Percodan addiction, his popularity in France, his feud with Sideshow Bob [which parallel's Lewis's real life feud with Dean Martin], Krusty's easily believing he could get the French Legion of Honour and his telethons for motion sickness [which parallels Lewis's real life telethons for muscular dystrophy]);
Much like Woody Allen, Krusty had a tempestuous marriage with Mia Farrow;
Krusty's show borrows many elements from The Tonight Show as hosted by Steve Allen, including opening monologues, interviews with guests and wacky comedy skits, even to the point of directly plagiarizing some of Allen's own gags;
Krusty becoming a comedian against the wishes of his disapproving, rabbi father is borrowed from Jackie Mason (who ironically voices Krusty's father in the show);
One of the most subtle is Johnny Carson (Krusty's thwarted a number of rival children's show hosts who've all tried to dethrone him as the number one children's show in America, similar to how Carson repeatedly beat various rival talk show hosts who tried to outdo him on late night TV);
Krusty's general Conspicuous Consumption lifestyle and Money Dumb financial problems are reminiscent of any number of real life celebrities who have the same issues.
Non-Ironic Clown: Krusty is a cynical parody of this (more specifically, Bozo), yet despite his being greedy and apathetic, his merchandise being low-quality and dangerous, and his show's shrinking budget, he manages to bring joy to children, and we occasionally see hints that even after everything, he still loves comedy. Even if he is a hack. In a flashback to his childhood, he admits to his rabbi father that he wants to be a clown because "I want to make people laugh!"
No Product Safety Standards: Every product he endorses. Krusty has even been shown to endorse a product without even looking at it before stamping it with his 'seal of quality'. When Bart wins a legal settlement after swallowing a jagged metal Krusty-O, it's replaced with flesh eating bacteria. His pregnancy tests can apparently induce birth defects. And his Krusty Burgers (both the burger and the establishments) are unsanitary Nutritional Nightmares.
Now, Buy the Merchandise: He has merchandised everything including home pregnancy tests, legal forms and traffic signs. Most of these products are extremely shoddily made.
Older Than They Look: He looks about the same age as Homer (who is in his late thirties, though he himself is a case of Younger Than They Look) but in many episodes he talks about being in show business for decades (fifty years according to a Season 26 episode).
Old-Timey Bathing Suit: He wears one in the episode "Insane Clown Poppy". Apparently for a jaded and washed-up celebrity who likes to indulge in vices, he draws the line at showing off his midsection (though it could just be to hide his third nipple and/or pacemaker scar).
Only in It for the Money: He will shill almost anything as long as it means a steady income. This includes his show being sponsored by the very drug he has been battling an addiction to.
Overly Long Name: Herschel Shmoikel Pinchas Yerucham Krustofsky.
Parental Neglect: Although he does try to be supportive to his illegitimate daughter Sophie, old habits do prevent him from being the best dad.
Plagiarism in Fiction: Krusty regularly plagiarizes material from other comedians.
Sad Clown: Krusty suffers from depression and can be quite self-loathing, which he self-medicates with alcohol. It's even discussed in one episode.
Homer: Let's tell Krusty! That guy's hilarious!
Marge: I keep telling you — off-camera he's a desperately unhappy man.
Sell-Out: He will always choose selling out over artistic integrity. He has endorsed so many products, in fact, that in "Homie The Clown" there's almost nothing left that he doesn't already endorse. That said, he's so bad with money, he almost has to shill everything he can to avoid going broke.
Signature Laugh: "Hoohoohoohahaha!"
Skin-Tone Disguise: "Bart the Fink" has Krusty the Clown give up on clowning. Bart and Lisa meet him as he's preparing to board a ship, and see that he's not wearing his clown facepaint. They eventually convince Krusty to come back, and when he does, he wipes his face off, revealing that his clown face is the real one. This idea was introduced in Season 4's "Homer's Triple Bypass", where Krusty reveals to Homer that his pale face is not make-up, but rather a side effect of his struggles with heart disease.
Smoking Is Edgy: He regularly smokes off stage to show that he is a Depraved Kids' Show Host who Hates the Job, Loves the Limelight. The episode "The Last Temptation of Krust" shows him smoking on stage as well after reinventing himself as an edgier, anti-establishment stand up comedian.
Smoky Voice: He speaks with a very gruff, raspy voice. This can be attributed to, among other things, his nicotine addiction.
So Unfunny, It's Funny: The Krusty the Klown Show runs on this, with clumsy gags and skits, awkward slapstick, and stolen jokes. The writers have claimed Krusty is a bit tricky to handle for this reason; writing someone who isn't funny and then making it funny is something of a balancing act.
Spin-Off Babies: An unusual In-Universe variant. Some clips of The Krusty The Klown Show depict it almost as a version of The Tonight Show for children.
Took a Level in Jerkass: In his early appearances, he was a fairly nice guy who acted like a goofy, fun-loving clown off the clock, to the point where he had trouble staying serious. Starting with season two, he was depicted as a Nice Character, Mean Actor who couldn't give a crap about the kids who watch his show and will happily sell them dangerous merchandise (albeit with the occasional kinder moment).
Triple Nipple: Among his identifying features is a "superfluous" third nipple just below his right one.
Undiscriminating Addict: At the height of his opulent lifestyle, he admits to inhaling moon rocks. All it does at that point is help him get to normal.
Ungrateful Bastard: Time and again he forgets about the good deeds people like Bart did to him that helped him avoid jailtime or outright cancellation of his show. It's all about him in the end.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: Flashbacks to his childhood show that Krusty was a happy child who wanted to become a clown because he enjoyed making people laugh.
Vocal Evolution: Krusty sounded much jollier and squeakier in his first few appearances. Around Season 3, his voice became far more raspy and deadpan.
Xtreme Kool Letterz: Tends to replace the "C"s in his shows' names with "K"s, to match his stage name. It bites him in the ass when he starts the "Krusty Komedy Klassic", and realizes too late just what the show's acronym spells. To make matters worse, he was live at the Apollo Theatre in Harlem at the time.
Yiddish as a Second Language: Krusty often peppers his dialogue with Yiddish words like ferkakta, schlub, and putz to give his phrases extra punch, although he makes an effort to hide this (and by extension his Jewish heritage) whenever he's on camera or performing.