Abhorrent Admirer: Milhouse has a one-sided relationship with Lisa that varies on obsession; sometimes he's open about his feelings for her and at one point he was found sleeping on her bedroom floor, other times he's trying to keep it a secret despite being terrible at it.
Ambiguously Bi: He was very jealous when Bart spent much time with Nelson and once jumped over a waterfall while exclaiming "I can't live in a world without Bart!". His file in the school psychiatrist's office says that he has "flamboyantly homosexual tendencies". However, he was also in love with Samantha Stankey until she transferred to a convent school. Plus he has a crush on Lisa.
Milhouse: (On seeing a pair of siblings) They're beautiful... I mean just the girl! I didn't notice the beautiful boy.
Awful Wedded Life: Depending on the episode, while Milhouse is happy with being married to Lisa. She, on the other hand, is questioning her decision and admits to Bart that she's considering an affair with Nelson Muntz.
Awkward Relatable Schoolkid: Milhouse is Bart's dorky best friend, often getting into situations like being bullied, having an unrequited crush on Lisa, and saying things he wishes he hadn't said.
Badass Boast: When he comes out the victor, he says "The house always wins". However, he's only ever said this twice. Once in "The Bart Wants What It Wants" and in "Treehouse Of Horror XXVI".
Big Ol' Eyebrows: One of the few characters on the show to have them, he and his family sport pairs of big, blue ones.
Bizarre Taste in Food: According to Lisa in "Lisa's Date with Density", Milhouse likes Vaseline on his toast.
Blind Without Them: He can barely see without his glasses, to the point where he mistakes a horseshoe crab and a truck for a dog.
Bully Magnet: Often bullied by Nelson and the Gang of Bullies, as he is one of their favorite targets.
Butt-Monkey: Milhouse has suffered everything from inheriting Bart's permanent record (which will disqualify him from all but the hottest and noisiest jobs) to being beaten into a coma by Nelson after he mistakes a love note Milhouse passes him from Lisa as coming from Milhouse himself, to having his manliness insulted in an episode set in the future when an adult Lisa is about to get married:
Lisa: I feel kind of weird wearing white, Mom. I mean, Milhouse...
Marge: Oh, Milhouse doesn't count.
They both laugh
The Cameo: He makes a surprising appearance as a member of the Master Builders in The LEGO Movie.
Characterization Marches On:
He wasn't a geek or a Butt-Monkey in the early seasons. He was Bart's Generic Guy best friend who happened to wear glasses and had no quirks whatsoever.
Initially Milhouse shared Bart's antipathy towards Lisa, an example of this can be seen in "Summer of 4 Ft. 2". The first time he was ever mentioned to have any interest in her was in "Lisa's Wedding" which took place in a possible future. In later seasons, kid Milhouse started showing interest in Lisa too.
Chick Magnet:
Briefly when his parents were lost in the sea and presumably deceased, the kids at the school were impressed by Milhouse's stoicism and the girls became attracted by him, including Lisa.
Even disregarding this event, Milhouse won the affection of at least three attractive girls at differing moments in his life: Angelica, Samantha, and Taffy. And in "Lisa's Date with Density", it's implied that Janey may have a crush on him (although it was just part of a quick gag).
The Corrupter: Milhouse is shown to be this in "Much Apu About Something". After Bart becomes a much better behaved child, Milhouse tries to encourage him to send Willy off of a cliff.
Cross-Dressing Voices: Both the original English version and many foreign dubs.
Dirty Coward: On his good days or bad days, Milhouse tends to run when things start to simply smell bad.
The Dog Bites Back: He's regularly taken advantage of by Bart. When he finally stands up to Bart and breaks off the friendship with him, Bart thinks Milhouse is just acting out until he sees that he's quite serious.
Dogged Nice Guy: Milhouse is openly infatuated with Lisa but he truly believes that being nice is enough to win her over. Despite Lisa constantly turning him down or being oblivious to his affections, he persists and goes as far as to sleep on her bedroom floor like a dog just to be close to her.
Dropped Glasses: Being a Butt-Monkey, he often loses or breaks his glasses, or has them taken from him.
Dumber Than They Look: Despite looking and behaving like a stereotypical scrawny nerd, Milhouse lacks any academic or other form of intelligence, and he's just a extremely immature, naïve, gullible, and socially awkward loser. He even denies being a nerd on the grounds "Nerds are smart."
Early-Bird Cameo: It's easy to forget he appeared in a Butterfinger commercial before his debut in the actual show.
Embarrassing Damp Sheets: He ran a segment on Kidz Newz showing how to dispose of a soiled mattress and claims his old friends in Capital City stopped liking him after a burglar broke in and wet his bed during a sleepover.
Embarrassing Middle Name: Milhouse Mussolini Van Houten.
Extreme Doormat: He tends to be the most submissive in his friendship with Bart, who often takes advantage of him.
Fair-Weather Friend: Both he and Bart regularly act as such to each other, as despite their bond, they will regularly bully or sell out the other to look good or even just for fun. One time he did win Lisa over, he cheated on her almost immediately.
Flanderization: He started out as Bart's slightly awkward, smarter-than-average but gray and unpopular best friend. His unpopularity and bad luck were exaggerated until he became the default Butt-Monkey and Straw Loser of Springfield's elementary. His personality changed later into making him extremely puny and childish in order to make him even more pathetic. His romantic interest in Lisa was not even brought up until "Lisa's Wedding" and rarely showed up until Mike Scully's time as a showrunner, and by the time Al Jean took over, his sole purpose in life became trying to impress her. The writers apparently didn't know what to do with him for a while, because he went through a crazy phase and a sissy phase before he became the Lisa-obsessed dork he is today.
Foil: To Bart, as Bart is a brash, extraverted troublemaker, while Milhouse is a sensitive, introverted nerd.
Future Badass: The closest he ever gets to this is some episodes showing him becoming a bodybuilder as a teenager, but he's still as much of a Butt-Monkey as ever.
Future Loser: Besides showing the fact that he will marry Lisa and have a daughter (that behaves like Bart but secretly admires both of them), things are weird. The usual future episodes with an arc of sorts has him be quite a good bodybuilder during the end of high school. After that, though, he falls quickly from grace and becomes an obese man who is probably worse than his father. Then he becomes a zombie, which has the indirect result of making Lisa fall for him (because as a zombie he is much less of a hassle and is actually more productive than when he was healthy, ironically).
Gag Nose: He has a bulbous nose about the size of a tennis ball. However, besides Homer once calling him a "four-eyed weiner with a big nose", it hasn't really ever been the source of a joke.
Gilded Cage: He's overprotected by his mother to the point that he's oversensitive. For example, when Luann hid the death of Nemo's mother and he discovered her death, he became traumatized and hid under the couch, which resulted in the firemen having to be called to pry him out.
Hated by All:
Save for Bart (sometimes), Milhouse is disliked or ignored by virtually everyone.
Children: Lisa likes Nelson!
Milhouse: She does not!
Children: Milhouse likes Lisa!
Janey: He does not!
Children: Janey likes Milhouse!
Uter: She does not!
Children: Uter likes Milhouse!
Mr. Largo: NOBODY likes Milhouse!
He doesn't even hold himself in high regard, frequently expressing sentiments of self-loathing.
Milhouse: I am not a nerd, Bart. Nerds are smart.
One of his quotes from The Simpsons Hit & Run he may say when you kick him repeatedly (sometimes into a river he has to keep climbing out of just so you can kick him back in again) sums it up pretty well... to actually rather depressing effect.
Milhouse: [sigh] Why am I so hated?
Henpecked Husband: To Lisa in some future episodes.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: His friendship with Bart definitely qualifies as this.
Hidden Depths: Turns out that he's fluent in Italian. How he learned is more proof of him being a Butt-Monkey, though: his Italian grandma constantly chased him around to whoop him with a branch because any use of English phrases pissed her off.
Hopeless Suitor: Milhouse harbors a hopeless crush on Lisa throughout the series, even going so far as to make awkward attempts to impress her. His feelings are unrequited, except for the hypothetical future episodes where he and Lisa do end up getting together.
Jerkass Ball: Plenty of times he has ruined things for other people, especially other children, either unintentionally or out of spite and jealousy.
A rather infamous example is from "Das Bus" where his actions not only almost get all the schoolchildren killed, but even as Bart and Lisa are trying to help him escape, he hinders their efforts as well.
He's also ruined happiness for both of them on separate occasions, such as in the episode "The Good, The Sad, And The Drugly", when Bart had a girlfriend that he genuinely loved and because he had previously set him up earlier in the episode, he told her who he really was and she broke up with him. Though to be fair Bart did break his promise to be there for him after he got suspended from school and grounded for taking the blame as mastermind behind one of Bart's prank.
Another time with Lisa, in the episode "Little Girl In The Big Ten", when she was able to fool some college girls into thinking she was one of them and was happy that she found people that accepted her, he ruins her happiness by telling the students she is only eight, leading them to abandon her, out of pure jealousy and selfishness.
Then in "The Color Yellow", he decides to further humiliate Lisa by telling her (in front of the whole school auditorium during her presentation) that her ancestor - a girl who tried to help a black man from being put in slavery - failed to keep the man safe in the end after doing her extensive research of her family tree. Just because she was wrong.
Kiddie Kid: Milhouse is shown to enjoy shows and toys that are aimed at the toddler demographic, and acts way younger than most 10-year-olds in and out of universe.
Loser Son of Loser Dad: Much like his father Kirk, he's a Butt-Monkey and Future Loser that everyone else looks down on and the universe enjoys tormenting for no real reason.
Mistaken for Gay: In addition to the taunt mentioned in the Butt-Monkey section, there's also: Nelson mistaking Lisa's note reading "Guess Who Likes You" as a love note from Milhouse (with Milhouse getting wheeled off into an ambulance in the next scene) from "Lisa's Date with Density", and the school psychiatrist having notes about Milhouse's "flamboyant tendencies" in his permanent record.
Nerd Glasses: It wasn't until Season 5 he actually realized he looked like a nerd.
Nerdy Inhaler: On the Season Nine episode "Das Bus", Bart takes Milhouse's inhaler (which he needs to live) and uses it as a snorkel. He doesn't come back with it, nor does Milhouse suffer a fatal asthma attack from it.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: In the episode, Das Bus, Milhouse rolls a grapefruit that gets stuck under the brake pedal as Otto is about to drive across a bridge over the ocean, causing Otto to crash the bus off and get the kids stranded on a deserted island.
No Social Skills: Milhouse is hopeless with other people. He can get along with Bart and Lisa but both are often embarrassed to be around him. Bart often mocks Milhouse and Milhouse in more focused on dating Lisa. His childish traits often leave him at the bottom of the social totem pole. As shown in "Little Orphan Millie" where he becomes a Chick Magnet with his bad boy persona after realizing how embarrassing he is.
Romantic Runner-Up: Depending on the Writer, in the future Lisa is either married to Milhouse or dating Nelson. With Nelson, the relationship is shown to be healthy or born from adultery. Whereas, the marriage with Milhouse is either dead or dying with Lisa considering a divorce or having an affair with Nelson.
Sickly Neurotic Geek: A nerdy kid who has many allergies. He's even allergic to his own tears. Heck, the first thing he said to Bart when meeting him in kindergarten was "I have soy milk, the doctor said the real kind could kill me."
Spoiled Brat: His parents have done their utmost to turn him into this despite usually being depicted as poorer than the Simpsons, with the entire family supported by Kirk working Burger Fool-type temporary gigs after his and Luann's reconciliation. In one case Kirk sold their house to fund an extravagant birthday party.
Stereotypical Nerd: Milhouse is a Sickly Neurotic Geek with a Nerdy Inhaler and Nerd Glasses, and one of the show's primary butt monkeys, partially because of his nerdy tendencies, but also because of his longstanding friendship with Bart. He's socially awkward, an Extreme Doormat puny, and pathetic, and oscillates between being Lisa's Abhorrent Admirer, Hopeless Suitor, and (in some flash forwards) Henpecked Husband. Though, this is a characterization Milhouse himself rejects since according to him, "I'm not a nerd, Bart. Nerds are smart.".
Straw Loser: Despite looking like a nerd, he says he doesn't have the typical intelligence/book-smart traits, meaning he's just a lame and dorky Butt-Monkey who makes Bart look cool by comparison.
Strong Family Resemblance: Lampshaded in an episode where Bart gives Milhouse a haircut after getting epoxy stuck in his hair — and ends up making Milhouse look like his loser father, Kirk, and using the likeness to do adult activities. Justified since his parents are (probably) cousins.
Took a Level in Cynic: Started out as a very cheerful kid, but got more cynical, depressed, and angry as time went on due to getting picked on by everyone.
Tuckerization: His full name is Milhouse Mussolini Van Houten. Milhouse is derived from President Richard Milhous Nixon, infamous for the Watergate scandal, Mussolini is derived from Benito Mussolini, the leader of the Fascist Party in World War II, and Van Houten is derived from Leslie Van Houten, of Manson Family infamy.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Ugly Guy to Lisa's Hot Wife in the future episodes.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Bart.
Vocal Evolution: Milhouse's voice got higher and raspier as the show went on.