Abhorrent Admirer: Towards Marge, and not just her. Moe's romantic attractions have resulted in criminal behavior and run-ins with the law; he has stalked Maude Flanders and other townspeople, he must register as a sex offender, and has had a restraining order placed upon him.
Acquainted with Emergency Services: Inverted for Black Comedy: he is so obsessed with trying to kill himself that Springfield's suicide prevention hotlines have blocked his number.
Alien Blood: Has been shown to bleed green. He claims that's only the first few drops and it will come out red afterwards.
Ambiguously Bi: Between his "not in public!" comment when Homer kissed him in "One Fish, Two Fish, Blowfish, Bluefish," waxing poetic about stupid pretty boy quarterbacks for a bit too long, secretly writing and enjoying gay fanfiction, calling himself Homer's life partner (and frequent jokes about him having a similar place in Homer's life to Marge), treating Homer going to other bars as if he were cheating on him, and using the excuse that he only kissed Waylon to "see what kissing a man was like" despite the fact he's kissed multiple men over the course of the series, an argument for Moe not being completely straight could definitely be made. Also falls into the Hypocrite category as he was shown in earlier years to be homophobic (although that's lessened exponentially over time, to the point where he was the first townsperson to speak up in defense of legalizing gay marriage in Springfield).
Ambiguously Human: Claims to be "half monster-half Armenian", his father was once shown to be a yeti, in one episode he cut himself and green stuff came out, and he once showed Bart and Milhouse a jar containing his tail.
Ax-Crazy: He has his moments.
Moe: (after beating a fake Homer with a bat) Who is the sociopath now?
Back-Alley Doctor: Revealed to be one in "HOMЯ", though he operates in his bar rather than a back alley.
Moe's Business Card: Yep, I'm a surgeon.
Badass Bystander: Moe is one of the most combat-capable characters in the series, either with his shotgun or with his fists.
Bartender Confidant: Moe is a complete subversion of the trope. Moe is scummy, he's a chronically depressed and unhappy man with no morals, no social circle outside the patrons of his bar, and extremely poor judgement. He should be the last person anyone takes advice from or trusts with any kind of secret. Yet he still tends to act as Homer's confidant.
Moe: Guys, after all the years I've given you advice, now I need a little advice from you.
Carl: We never follow your advice.
Lenny: The one time I did, I went to jail for three years!
Moe: You made some good friends, didn't ya?!
Backstory of the Day: Far from unique on this show, but he is rather prone to it. Episodes will reveal out of nowhere that he's a former prizefighter, was a forgotten member of the Little Rascals, is a devout snake-handler/follower of Voodoo, is an illegal immigrant (and his ethnic heritage isn't kept straight either)... the list goes on and on. Though in fairness, the "prizefighter" bit hasn't been totally thrown by the wayside, as people will sometimes call attention to his cauliflower ears. In "Dumbbell Indemnity," he explains to Renee that boxing permanently made his brain erratic.
Berserk Button: Whoever that one punk kid is that keeps bothering his place with prank calls. The second he gets even the slightest clue who it is, he drops everything to get sweet, sweet revenge.
Big Damn Heroes: Moe has used his shotgun to "persuade" people not to hurt Homer and Marge.
Bigfoot, Sasquatch, and Yeti: Moe Goes from Rags to Riches shows that his father was a yeti.
Breakout Character: Initially just another member of the secondary cast, Moe gradually grew into one of the most important characters in the series outside of the Simpson family.
Brooklyn Rage: Can be pissed off just by being humiliated by a prank call and has a New York accent (since his voice is based off of Al Pacino).
Butt-Monkey: In later seasons, he becomes one of the biggest losers along with Kirk and Gil. It's well known he hates his life and is so desperate that he wants to kill himself, though it's usually Played for Laughs.
Child Hater: Except during his Friend to All Children moments. The latter is most notable with the Simpson kids.
Moe: See, this is why we should hate kids!
Comic-Book Fantasy Casting: Comedian Rich Hall always claimed Moe's likeness was based on him, which Matt Groening eventually confirmed.
Creepy Good: Even though he's a fundamentally good person, he's often quite unnerving.
Deep-Fried Whatever: Ordered a giant, military-grade deep fryer for his restaurant Uncle Moe's Family Feedbag. It can flash-fry a buffalo in 40 seconds (which, according to Homer, is too long to wait).
Did Not Get the Girl: His easy-to-lose harsh temper usually turns down women and finding a girlfriend for Moe has therefore been a running joke, from indulged sexual abstinence to unsuccessful suicide attempts to dating generally rejected women.
Driven to Suicide: The later episodes play up the fact that Moe is so depressed that he keeps trying to kill himself — to the point that Suicide Prevention has to block his number. It is also implied at least once that the only reason why he constantly attempts to commit suicide is because Reverend Lovejoy keeps on telling him that he has nothing to live for.
Early Installment Character-Design Difference: In the first season, Moe had black hair and wore a white shirt, peach apron and pink bow tie. From the second season onwards, Moe has grey hair and wears a lavender blue shirt with a navy blue apron and bow tie.
Eye Scream: Apparently has a tendency to do this to people he invites to his house.
Everyone Has Standards: Played for Laughs in Lisa the Iconoclast:
“Homer, you know I support, uh, most any prejudice you can name, but your hero-phobia sickens me"
Flanderization: He started out as a cheap, grumpy bartender who would do anything for a little extra money, including resorting to humorous behind-the-scenes illegal activities (such as smuggling animals for unknown reasons). He was also surly and hot-tempered, but still a good man overall. He was just a troubled, unhappy grouch living a disappointing, loveless life and doing whatever he can to improve it. As the series progressed however, his behavior became increasingly unethical and criminal. He started to encourage alcoholism, became a registered sex offender, engaged in far worse crimes, and is now subjected to a Running Gag where he attempts suicide and always fails due to bad luck.
Former Child Star: In one episode he claims he was one of The Little Rascals. And in-universe it actually appears to be true.
Friend to All Children: Despite being creepy to adults, children love him. He's quite nice to Bart (Moe doesn't know he is the one prank calling him) and Lisa (who tells Moe she likes him in "Homer the Moe"), and is the nicest babysitter Maggie's ever had. He also reads to sick children at the hospital on Wednesday nights.
The Friend Nobody Likes: His loyal customers are the closest thing he has to actual friends, but sometimes he annoys them like in "My Fare Lady" when they call him a "jerk". Lampshaded in "Pygmoelian":
Moe: Okay, I get it. I ain't pleasant to look at.
Lenny: Or listen to.
Carl: Or be with.
Gonk: A running gag is that he is ugly. Sometimes to the point of being considered inhuman.
Gun Nut: Moe loves his shotgun, and he isn't afraid to threaten people with it. He's saved both Homer and Marge with it on separate occasions.
Hair-Trigger Temper: He is very impulsive and irritable.
Hero of Another Story: After "Das Bus" ended he somehow saved the kids who were stuck on an island, not to mention his adventures at the end of "The Homer They Fall". Apparently one Christmas while attempting suicide, he was shown what the world would be like had he never been born.
Hidden Depths: Some of his ambiguous backstory includes details like being a voodoo practitioner, as well as going to homeless shelters to read them books like Little Women (of course, when Ned Flanders points this out, Moe tells him that if he ever makes it public knowledge, he will tear Ned apart).
Hollywood Voodoo: Reveals himself to be a practicer in "The Joy of Sect", and he uses voodoo dolls to make Barney want beer. Back in "Homer the Heretic" he claimed to be a snake-handler, which either contradicts thisnote  or reinforces it.note 
Hope Crusher: He makes people's lives just a bit more hellish through a variety of nasty pranks so he will feel a little bit better about himself.
Hypocrite: Once railed against "immigants", despite being an immigrant of some ambiguous kind himself.
I Coulda Been a Contender!: Moe is frustrated by the failure of his once promising boxing career, which he blames on politics, rather than the fact he couldn't take a punch.
I Just Want to Have Friends: He often feels lonely and it's implied many times that he Desperately Craves Affection, such as the episode "Moe Goes from Rags to Riches" where he thinks his only friend is his bar rag (although, other episodes make it clear that he's friends with his customers).
Informed Deformity: While Moe is quite odd-looking compared to other characters, people act like he's hideous and even inhuman. He's not even that odd looking by Groening-character design standards—he really isn't any uglier than Nelson, Barney, or Mr. Burns. None of them are supposed to be particularly good looking, but none of them are considered monsters the same way he is.
I Take Offense to That Last One: Played with.
Ned Flanders: (in an uncharacteristic bout of rage) You ugly, hate-filled man!
Moe: Hey! I may be ugly and hate-filled but- ...what was that third thing you said?
I Was Quite a Looker: Then he started boxing, which is the explanation for why he became so ugly that women find him repulsive.
"They called me Kid Gorgeous. Then I was Kid Presentable. Then Kid Gruesome. Then finally, Kid Moe."
Jerkass Has a Point: Of course he's a Stalker with a Crush to Marge and encourages Homer to drink as much as possible, so he's biased that the latter doesn't deserve the former, but Homer often does need a good kick to not take Marge for granted.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Despite his somewhat angry and occasionally unpleasant attitude at times, he shows a soft spot towards children and his close friends and customers. He also does very noble acts in the credits of "The Homer They Fall", being seen saving multiple people, putting out a forest fire, and giving food to a famished village.
Kindhearted Cat Lover: Moe really loves cats. He dotes on his pet cat Mr. Snookums, is kind to Snowball II, and kisses a random stray cat after successfully getting a date.
Multiple-Choice Past: Several episodes contradict each other as to what his nationality actually is.
Noble Demon: He gets on quite well with the Simpsons. He's bonded with the Simpson kids, and used his shotgun to save Homer from being beaten up and Marge from being threatened by a gang of angry cab drivers.
No Celebrities Were Harmed;
Hank Azaria described his original voice as a bad Al Pacino impression.
Bart pranking him was based on retired boxer, Louis "Red" Deutsch whose bar would get pranked called every week by radio DJs, John Elmo and Jim Davidson. When he realized he was being pranked, Red would get mad and threaten to kill them.
Non-Specifically Foreign: Has an ambiguous ethnic background - has variously been implied or described as Dutch, Italian, Armenian, Arab, Polish...
Odd Friendship: With Sideshow Mel, of all people. Lampshaded in "Moho House".
Sideshow Mel: Why are you telling me?
Moe: I always considered us friends.
Papa Wolf: To Maggie Simpson. He'll go to extreme lengths to keep her happy and safe, including facing down the Springfield Mafia. While this plot gets dropped in the series proper, the spin-off comics and books show that Moe remains Maggie's doting babysitter even after the events of "Moe Baby Blues."
Parental Neglect:
Implied in "Pokey Mom", where he mentions lingering emotional pain because his father never hugged him.
Moe: Now I can focus on my crippling emotional pain. Oh daddy, why? Why won't you hug me? You hugged the mailman!
One episode implies that Moe's parents left him at a summer camp and never came to pick him up.
As of "King Leer," he now has a solid backstory, which includes Moe's father kicking him out as a preteen for disappointing him. Judging by the constant name-calling from his father and siblings, Moe's sister treating his abandonment as his fault, and the fact that their go-to for winning family arguments is to start smacking each other with shoes, it's reasonable to assume the mistreatment went beyond neglect.
Perpetual Frowner: He's a fairly depressed individual, as shown when he attempts to commit suicide in "Moe Baby Blues".
Promotion to Opening Titles: He gets added to the intro in Season 2, as Bart skates past him.
Punny Name: Not Moe himself, but he's always being asked for Al Coholic, Jacques Strappe, I.P. Freely, Seymour Butz, Homer Sexual (not Homer Simpson), Ivana Tinkel, Mike Rotch, Amanda Huggin-Kiss, and Hugh Jass.note 
Running Gag:
He often receives humiliating prank calls from Bart Simpson. He's unaware who's calling, and issues death threats to the caller.
In the later seasons, every other appearance of his features another failed suicide attempt.
Sadist: A few times he mentions his enjoyment of feeding on the disappointment of others, usually for very petty reasons like having their parking spot taken.
Self-Applied Nickname: Whenever he wants to appeal to kids he calls himself "Uncle Moe"—he once turned his bar into the family restaurant "Uncle Moe's Family Feedbag," and also used it when babysitting Maggie in "Moe Baby Blues" and bonding with Marge and the Simpson kids in "Mommie Beerest."
Shotguns Are Just Better: Keeps one behind his bar and uses one as part of his self defence through dance class.
Stalker with a Crush: He has long been infatuated with Marge (whom he often refers to as Midge) and has on occasion professed his love for her and tried to win her away from Homer. His infatuation was intense enough to enter stalker territory. Ironically, she's one of his most frequent customers' wives.
Stealth Pun: Constantly threatens his mysterious prank caller with death if he ever finds out who they are. Guess this bartender would really like to be a Bart-ender.
Straw Loser: He is often portrayed as ridiculously pathetic (especially later episodes) to the point of being a bigger loser than his customers.
Suicide as Comedy: Keeps a noose tied and ready, just in case.
Territorial Comic Relief: In "Radioactive Man", Moe claims that he was once one of the original members of The Little Rascals, but was fired after he beat the original Alfalfa to death for stealing his signature Running Gag.
Throw the Dog a Bone: In "The Wayz We Were," he reunites with Maya from "Eeny Teeny Maya Moe" and the two end up getting married, despite Moe's paranoia that she would leave him if her ever said he loved her.
Took a Level in Badass: Sometimes, like in the couch gag where the couches attack and Moe is seen as the one of the few fighting back, blasting at his bar seats with a shotgun and knocking away his stools.
Toxic Friend Influence: In several instances, Moe shows he deliberately manipulates Homer and Barney into drinking, confident in his belief that they'll be back. And if they turn against him, Moe quickly becomes incredibly sour, slapping Barney when he tries to point out Moe insulted Homer behind his back.
Trapped by Gambling Debts: He once mentions owing $64,000 and asks the Simpsons for funds to dig himself back up. But he too is a Loan Shark, matter-of-factly telling Homer when he needs a loan that if he can't provide collateral, he will have to break his legs right then and there.
Unexplained Recovery: He was hit by a train in "Lisa Goes Gaga", but is back alive and well in "Moonshine River".
Vitriolic Best Buds: More or less with all his regular customers.
Vocal Evolution: Moe's voice sounds more nasally in the first few seasons to reflect his weasel-like qualities. Sometime after season 6, Hank Azaria dropped the nasal inflection and Moe's voice lowered considerably into Hank's natural speaking octave.
White Sheep: Moe's not a beacon of purity, but, as "King Leer" shows, he's much better than the rest of his family, who, beyond somehow being more sleazy and corrupt than Moe when it comes to business, will also happily abandon him, insult him, throw him under the bus (in the case of his siblings), or manipulate him for their own gain, (in the case of his father, who delights in manipulating all his children and pitting them against each other). They're actually so bad that Marge flat out tells him that he's justified in cutting off his family because he deserves better than them, despite her firm belief that families should always work things out and stick together. In fact, while describing his family situation, Moe acknowledges the trope by name.
Moe: Yeah, well, let me explain. You know how the world sees me as a, uh—
Homer: Human toilet brush?
Moe: Bingo. Well, I'm the white sheep of my family.
With Friends Like These...: He treats his customers as he treats everyone else, even the ones who are somewhat closer to him, contributing to his The Friend Nobody Likes status. It doesn't help that he's constantly hitting on Homer's wife.