Abusive Parents:
His father and mother were sweet and caring... but unfortunately young Burns went to live with his grandfather, who was not the nicest or morally upstanding of men, if he had any morals at all (at least his parents got to keep his brother George). After a Retcon, we see that his father wasn't that nice either, complaining he should be outside hurting dogs instead of reading comic books.
Burns has also been on the giving end of this treatment:
When Mr. Burns reunites with his long-lost illegitimate son, he pretty much disowns him by the end of the episode, and all but states that he'll only contact him if he's in need of a kidney. He also refers to him as "it" on one occasion.
When Mr. Burns takes Bart under his wing, he initially seems to have an almost avuncular relationship with the boy. This trope comes into play, however, when he tries (and nearly succeeds) to persuade Bart that his parents no longer love him.
Adult Sleeps with Stuffed Toy: Is shown to be very attached to his childhood teddy bear Bobo in the episode "Rosebud," demonstrating a more vulnerable, childlike facet to his personality. Subsequent episodes show that he still sleeps with his beloved teddy bear, and Smithers brings it to him whenever he's bedridden due to injury or illness.
Affably Evil: On his better days, Burns is still evil, but sincerely friendly in his own way. When not giving ludicrous punishments or otherwise screwing with his employees, he's surprisingly chummy with them.
Affectionate Nickname: During the odd incidences in which he and Homer are friendly with each other, Homer is prone to calling him "Burnsie."
Ambiguously Bi: While his romantic ventures have been based around women, Burns has been shown that he is not above flirting with the same sex — whether it is the Smithers facsimile named Phillip from season 18's "Kill Gil vol. 1&2", owning a nude photo of Mark Twain in the episode "Rosebud", stating outright he enjoys the smell of other men in the episode "Homer vs Lisa and the 8th Commandment", a brief jovial mention of him marrying boxer Jack Dempsey while drunk in the comics or the running gag of his occasional flirtation with both Smithers (such as telling him outright that he loves him in "The Telltale Head" and referring to him as "lovely" in "Homer Goes to College") and Homer Simpson (both comics and show, such as calling him "buxom and flirty" in "Last of the Red Hat Mamas,") the question of 'is he or isn't he' is still a valuable cornerstone of his core character.
Ambiguously Human: It's pretty suspicious that he can take a bullet in the chest and survive, especially considering his age. He also brags about his "strong, sharp teeth" and threatens to "club [people] and eat their bones"... and when, in the episode that has him dating Marge's mother, she tells him "You are the Devil himself!", Burns becomes very angry and defensive ("What?! Who told you- ") before realizing she's speaking metaphorically. Quite a number of one-off jokes have also suggested he's way older than any human should be.
Ambiguously Jewish: Possibly. In "Two Cars In Every Garage And Three Eyes On Every Fish," he brings noodle kugel to the Simpsons family dinner. (Given that one of the episode's writers was Jewish, this may or may not have been intentional.) He's also been shown to be related to famous Jewish comedian George Burns. However, if anything, Mr. Burns' religious beliefs appear to range from atheism to Satanism.
Angry Guard Dog: "Release the hounds".
Angsty Surviving Twin: Has mentioned that his twin was shot by him or one of his siblings in order to get the family inheritance.
Animal Motifs: Is often associated with birds, in particular, vultures.
His character design, with his thin frame, skinny neck, and beak-like nose, makes him look very bird-like.
His home includes a menagerie◊ filled with birds, (including vultures that look remarkably like himself◊,) and in 'Fraudcast News', his alter ego in his Itchy & Scratchy propaganda cartoon is a vulture.
In a more subtle example, nearly all of the establishing shots of the Nuclear Power Plant are accompanied by the sound of a crow's caw. According to 'Burns, Baby, Burns,' he apparently has several pet peacocks that wander around the grounds of Burns Manor.
In 'The Fool Monty,' Mr. Burns is rendered mentally incompetent after suffering from a head injury. While the mayor holds a meeting to discuss what to do with him, Burns is restrained, appropriately enough, in an over-sized bird cage◊.
Antiquated Linguistics: All the time. In one example, from "Mother Simpson", he went to the post office in order to send a letter to the Prussian consulate in Siam by the 4:30 auto-gyro. The person working at the post office even informed him how historically out of touch he is. Naturally, his mother—who apparently had a torrid affair with President Taft—uses even more outdated language than her son:
Smithers: Hello, Mrs. Burns? This is Waylon Smithers; I have your son Montgomery on the line.
Mrs. Burns: That improvident lackwit? Always too busy striding about his atom mill to call his own mother! I'll give him what-fors 'till he cries 'brassafrax!'
Asshole Victim: Mr. Burns would potentially have been this had he not survived the events of "Who Shot Mr. Burns". That was the whole idea of the Cliffhanger; practically everyone in Springfield wanted to kill him, and in many cases, few would have blamed them, due to Burns's unusually extensive asshole behavior lately. However, not only did he survive, the shooting was an accident (maybe, the ending leaves it ambiguous), leaving it subverted in two different ways.
Bad Boss: Has a trap door in his office to dismiss employees and is fond of villainous demotivators.
Bald of Evil: Well, balding. Flashbacks show he used to have a comb-over in the sixties.
Been There, Shaped History: Apparently, he was behind the Opium War, which would make him a lot older than the century-odd he claims to be.
Big Bad: He's the show's usual recourse when a scheming, villainous plotter is needed for a story. This applies to the video games as well, as he's been the main villain of the arcade game, The Simpsons: Bart vs. the World, and The Simpsons: Road Rage.
Big Bad Ensemble: With Sideshow Bob. Bob is a more active and dangerous threat to the Simpsons, but Mr. Burns is the show's go-to guy for a villainous schemer.
Boisterous Weakling: He's not one to pick on his own size. Despite being a skinny, sickly, laughably frail old man who has numerous bodyguards, he has the propensity to frequently physically lash out / attempt to assault people who anger or annoy him. Examples include trying to attack Principal Skinner in "Who Shot Mr. Burns," Smithers in "Rosebud," and the Springfield University board member in "Homer Goes To College," all examples which left him visibly weak/winded. He also smacked Smithers with a cane in "A Star Is Burns" and assaulted Homer in numerous ways in "Homer the Smithers."
Brain Food: He mentions eating monkey brains a few times and also one of his assistant during a trip where he sold him to cannibals.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: He may be senile, but he is a brilliant businessman... when he can remember what century he's living in, at least.
But for Me, It Was Tuesday: Has a huge problem with this relative to Homer, who he's had countless bizarre encounters and adventures with, some of which would be considered life-changing by any reasonable standard, and yet he never remembers Homer from one meeting to the next.
The Caligula: Mr. Burns usually treats his workers, and even his own workplace, far too shabbily to even be considered a sane boss, never mind a good one.
Caligula's Horse: The power plant is actually legally owned by a canary, as a way for Burns to avoid responsibility when it's investigated for illegal activities. This tendency was also implied in earlier episodes when he made a dog vice president (even after nominating a far more eligible person), and made a carbon rod Employee of the Month instead of Homer.
Camp Straight: In addition to viewing himself as The Fashionista during a musical number in which he sings about all of the clothes he has that are made of animals, he also has an affinity for the colors pink and purple, he's been shown wearing dresses multiple times rather unashamedly (even entering- and winning- a beauty pageant for teen girls,) and much of the decor in his house is shown to be noticably feminine. He also has a breathy, elegant manner of speaking and remarkably feminine-looking hands with limp wrists. Despite all of this, he is overtly interested in women.
Can't Kill You, Still Need You: Even though he's the most hated man in Springfield, he's allowed to use his nuclear plant to break countless laws and regulations. If the plant closes down, then the town suffers from a horrifically low employment rate and a power shortage. Quimby even says he is the only person in town that actually pays municipality taxes.
Card-Carrying Villain: At least whenever declaring his own evil doesn't compromise its effectiveness. Or sometimes, even when it does.
Catchphrase:
"Excellent."
"Release the hounds!"
"Smithers! Who is that <insert colorful insult>?" [...] "Simpson, eh?"
He will also occasionally answer the phone with “Ahoy-hoy!”
Comedic Sociopathy: Many of his evil-doings are played for laughs. See below.
Corrupt Corporate Executive: Poster boy for this trope. He's dumped radioactive waste at public parks and playgrounds, sold weapons to the Nazis, stolen a trillion dollars in foreign aid money from the U.S. government, and (most famously) built a giant sun-blocking device to keep Springfield shrouded in perpetual darkness, all so his electric company could have a truly complete monopoly over the town's energy supply.
Mr. Burns: Listen, Spielbergo, Schindler and I are like peas in a pod! We're both factory owners, we both made shells for the Nazis, but mine worked, DAMMIT!
The Corrupter: When he takes Bart on as his heir, Burns tries to mold Bart in his image. It nearly worked, if Burns hadn't tried to fire Homer.
Cruella to Animals: He has to brainwash Santa's Little Helper to retrain him as a guard dog. And in "Two Dozen And One Greyhounds", he attempts to make a tuxedo out of a litter of puppies.
Dark Is Evil: He once had a plan to block out the sun permanently.
Depending on the Writer:
He can be a senile old man who can't do anything on his own and still thinks it's the early 1900s, or an extremely conniving Corrupt Corporate Executive (often he's both).
Can either be depicted as a penny-pincher who will go out of his way to cut corners and fire anyone he can ("Last Exit to Springfield") or as completely apathetic to everything that goes on in the plant. ("Homer's Enemy")
It's rare, but some episodes, like "King-Size Homer", can have him act as a Benevolent Boss if it suits the plot.
Depending on the episode, he's either a Jerk with a Heart of Jerk who's absolutely as evil as he lets on, or a Jerk with a Heart of Gold who actually has a (very neglected) conscience and is actually capable of being kind to others.
Depending on what's funniest, Burns' exact age fluctuates. Sometimes he was a child in the early 1900s, while at other times he was already an unfathomably wealthy miser by then, or he'll be responsible for historical atrocities as far back as the Opium War. Some episodes even hint he's some kind of immortal supernatural being around since the beginning of humanity.
Desperately Craves Affection: His mother really did a number on him, throwing art of her hugging him into the fire “because I don’t like lies”. Of course Burns deems “affection” as people paying attention to him at all, and being good is far too much work.
The Determinator: How one could interpret the fact that he's still alive and kicking, not to mention still working full time and running a massive business, despite being an advanced geriatric constantly teetering on the verge of death. He has even survived, and fully recovered from, being shot in the chest in the same episode in which his age was stated to be 104! It is implied that sheer stubbornness and willpower are the only things keeping him alive (well, that and his extravagent wealth )
Dirty Old Man: Towards Marge, when she briefly works at the nuclear power plant.
Dragon-in-Chief: Parodied. In "C.E.D'oh", it turns out that while Burns technically runs the power plant, he named a canary as the "real" head of the plant to protect him from being held responsible for the plant's wrongdoings. After Homer let the canary go, Burns eventually became the real head of the plant.
Enraged by Idiocy: Often shown to be infuriated by the idiots he has working for him. Especially Homer, even if he can't remember his name.
Epic Fail: The filming of the Mexico scene in his film "A Burns For All Seasons". They had to do 20 takes, and the best one had Burns falling off his horse and then getting dragged around with his foot caught in the stirrup. In fact, almost any attempt at physical activity can produce this, such as the time he failed to seize a teddy bear from a baby.
Even Evil Can Be Loved: A thoroughly irredeemable Bad Boss and Corrupt Corporate Executive, whose only humanising trait is that he has the Undying Loyalty of his assistant Smithers.
Even Evil Has Loved Ones:
While it varies Depending on the Writer, he is occasionally shown to legitimately care about Smithers as a person. Some episodes play up that Smithers is not just his only true friend, but one of the very few people Burns can never truly bring himself to hurt (Blood Feud being a prime example) and later season episodes highlight that while he may or may not return Smithers' romantic interest, he does love him in his own way.
When recounting the fate of Larry's mother, Burns is actually saddened as he mentions how he never saw her after she was sent off to South America.
Although he openly treats most living things with contempt, he does have a soft spot for his loyal hounds. In "Portrait of a Lackey on Fire," he's even seen acting like a Panicky Expectant Father when one of his hounds is about to have puppies.
He genuinely considered Smithers's father his friend and was saddened by his death.
He's seriously considered leaving his entire fortune and estate to Sheldon◊, his pet tortoise that he's apparently had for most of his life.
He was engaged to his cousin Lyla in his youth and sincerely loved and desired to marry her. His dark side made this all but impossible, however. Likewise, he genuinely loved Gloria (whom he also proposed to) and was heartbroken when she eventually ran back to her ex-boyfriend Snake.
During his short-lived marriage with Persephone Odair, he showed nothing but love and support for her goals. He even went as far as to buy her Twitter when Persephone faced criticism on the platform. Even after finding out that she lied to him about her true motives, Burns still offers Persephone a chance to come clean about her motives and for their relationship to last. After their divorce, Burns was very heartbroken and was shown crying during the divorce proceedings and again while jumping in an inflatable castle by himself in his office.
"The Past and the Furious" also showed he loved his mother and bred a flower that resembled her. He was also good friends with Edith Simpson, Homer's grandmother, and the two played jazz together at the local club, even remembering her with very little prompting from Lisa despite not seeing her in decades.
Even Evil Has Standards:
He doesn't have a high opinion of lawyers.
I want your legal advice, I even pay for it, but to me you're all vipers! You live on personal injury! You live on divorces! YOU LIVE ON PAIN AND MISERY!
He pays Homer to throw pudding cups at Lenny, much to their amusement. Then Homer throws one at Carl.
[horrified] What are you doing, man?! That's Carl!
Unlike many an Attempted Homewrecker who has tried to come between Homer and Marge, he respects marriage and won't make a move on someone he knows is married.
In "Marge Gets a Job," Marge gets a job at the power plant and Burns is immediately smitten with his new employee—although he's met her many times at this point without expressing any such thing, this is the first time she's been introduced to him as anything other than Homer Simpson's wife. He pursues her under the assumption that she's single and, upon finding out she's married, makes no further attempt to win her over. He is not, however, above firing her from her job out of spite.
In "Midnight Rx," he announced that the nuclear plant health plan was going to be cut to remove prescription medication costs. After the party, he asked Smithers if he saw a female coworker hooking up with a man she's been after for a while. Once Smithers says that the man she's after is married, Burns orders Smithers to turn their vehicle around so he can warn her.
He can't bring himself to kill the greyhound puppies because they're just too cute. He then nearly shoots Bart and Lisa instead, but refuses for the same reasons.
In "Homer's Enemy," he (along with everyone else) is disgusted, and visibly cringes, when Frank Grimes dies by electrocution. He also had a concerned (as well as annoyed) look on his face while Grimes was going insane and pretending to be Homer Simpson.
In "Homer the Smithers", not only was he shocked when Homer and Smithers were fighting, but he also tried to stop them from fighting.
In "Thirst Trap: A Corporate Love Story", he was horrified when Persephone was willing to risk poisoning elementary school children with saltwater. Albeit it's largely out of fear of him being criminally liable but still. And, he divorced Persephone after finding out that she lied to him about being a good person.
In "Bart's Brain", he and Smithers faint upon seeing Bart's Brain in a Jar.
For as bigoted as Mr. Burns can be, he draws the line at transphobia. And while he is oblivious to Smithers' obvious crush on him, he's still supportive of his homosexuality in "Portrait of a Lackey on Fire" - albeit by encouraging Smithers to marry a Corrupt Corporate Executive even eviler than Burns.
Smithers: They do have an excellent LGBT policy.
Mr. Burns: What's that stand for? Lazy Goof-off Buffoons? And transgender.
All the way back in "Lisa's Pony," Burns was willing to oversee Homer's loan so he could buy a pony, but first wanted clarification he wasn't planning to eat the animal.
Evil Cannot Comprehend Good:
His moral compass is so far off-kilter that when he's actually trying to do something good, he's even more evil than when he's trying to be evil, as seen in "The Old Man and the Lisa."
The reason why he hid Smithers Sr.'s body was because Burns thought it was the trend of the time and honored his friend's Heroic Sacrifice by doing so.
Evil Has a Bad Sense of Humor: It should be noted that Burns is the only one in-universe to find panda rape along with the aftermath (an eight-year-old having to comfort her dad like he’s a rape victim) hilarious.
Evil Is Hammy: "Fifteen minutes from now, I will wreak a terrible vengeance on this city! NO ONE WILL BE SPARED! NO ONE!"
Evil Is Petty: He does a number of petty things for no reason other than For the Evulz.
It will be like taking candy from a baby (sees baby) Hey, that sounds like a lark!
His reaction to a worker asking for Burns to install actual safety measures for the plant? Taunt him, humiliate him, and have him sent via pneumatic tube to places unknown.
Evil Laugh: The page image!
Evil Old Folks: The Trope Codifier for the comedic version. He's done every evil deed imaginable, from blotting out the sun to stealing candy from a baby, and that was just in one episode.
Expy:
Of Charles Foster Kane. Burns has a lot of moments and traits that are almost directly transplanted from Orson Welles' character; though, where Kane was a sympathetic and misguided Anti-Villain at worst, Burns is an outright greedy, power-mad, unscrupulous monster. He also draws a lot from Ronald Reagan, Rupert Murdoch and Lionel Barrymore, among others.
Depending on the episode, he's also a pretty uncanny modern-day expy of Ebenezer Scrooge. He's a ruthless, wealthy, elderly corrupt businessman who more or less constantly makes those working for him miserable, who occasionally expresses Lonely at the Top sentiments, but at the same time, can occasionally be persuaded to do the right thing under the circumstances, when someone else (usually Smithers) appeals to his better nature. Heck, Mr. Burns is shown dressed as◊/playing the role of◊ Scrooge on multiple occasions, both in the show and the comics!
Familial Foe: The Arch-Enemy to three generations of the Simpsons family; he's also directly responsible for a majority of Homer's tragedies in his life.
He drove Mona away by identifying her during a hippy protest, forcing her to abandon Homer. Even when Mona was acquitted, Mr. Burns got her arrested by the FBI for using multiple fake names in the visitor books of theme parks, which is a federal offense.
Mona abandoning her family caused Abe to become emotionally abusive towards Homer, and Mr. Burns tried to kill Abe or make him suffer when they served together in the United States army. Mr. Burns also tried to have Homer's dog, Bongo, euthanized for biting him but was convinced to spare the dog by Abe when the latter offered to be Mr. Burns' dog handler. He also inadvertently traumatised Homer as a child by disposing of Waylon Smithers, Sr.'s corpse. Homer discovered the corpse by accident while removing a blockage in an old quarry and the repressed trauma caused him to subconsciously develop an eating disorder to cope.
Finally, he employed Homer to work in a Power Plant that has so many health code violations that it made Homer sterile. He also sexually harassed Marge, hit Bart with a car, crossed swords with Lisa's environmentalism, and antagonized Maggie when she unwittingly adopted his teddy bear. Maggie is also notable for shooting Burns, albeit by accident, when Burns attempted to steal Maggie's lolipop and his gun fell into Maggie's hand during the struggle. Oh, and he can't remember Homer's name.
Faux Affably Evil: For the most part, he keeps the façade of a polite and soft-spoken businessman while in truth he couldn’t care less about his employees.
Fiction 500: His fortune varies but on his best day, he can pay a million dollar fine and buy the statue of Lady Justice with what is in his wallet.
Flanderization:
He went from being a ruthless, black-hearted corporate tyrant to a doddering old man with a skewed, quasi-Victorian conception of society. While the writers attempt every so often to enforce his villainous tendencies, his role in the show is now mostly limited to jokes concerning his incalculable age and pronounced frailty.
Although he had always played an antagonizing role, he originally didn't expand much from being a Jerkass, a Bad Boss, and a Corrupt Corporate Executive who shown little concern about how his actions and company effects the environment, compared to his role later on in "Who Shot Mr. Burns? Part One" where he was not just effecting the environment, but the town's activities as well (such as crushing the Springfield's retirement home and Bart's treehouse drilling for the pursuit of oil). And as stated previously above, Mr. Burns started out as being in his eighties. His senile state has also been exaggerated in later seasons, as well as his aging, to the point of him not even having enough strength to stomp an ant.
The episode in Season 3 where Burns sells the power plant seems strange now because he seems to get along all right after he and Smithers part ways. Later episodes (e.g. "Homer the Smithers" in Season 7, "The Old Man and the Lisa" in Season 8) show him unable to function without Smithers as his assistant/caregiver.
Finger-Tenting: Possibly the most prominent and well-known example in all fiction.
Forgotten First Meeting: He repeatedly forgets who Homer is, partly due to his old age and partly due to his abject disregard for his employees.
Freudian Excuse: His father refused to let him have comic books and burned down the company to teach him a lesson (with the people still in it). He also apparently taught him how to be an asshole. He was also taken by his grandfather, a corrupt and selfish businessman.
Friend to Bugs: He's been shown to engage in beekeeping as a hobby, even naming the individual bees. In his office, he also has a small terrarium filled with tarantulas, which he affectionately dubs "Tarantula Town." He was apparently fond of tarantulas during his younger years◊, as well.
Gag Nose: Has a large, hooked nose resembling a beak.
Gag Penis: Though he's incensed that Marge's publicly unveiled nude portrait of him was accurate, he is thankful to her that she didn't take artistic license with making his genitals look worse than how he thinks they do.
Go-Karting with Bowser: Surprisingly, there are multiple instances in which he and Homer are genuinely friendly with each other. Examples include "Dancin' Homer," in which he and Homer get drunk and heckle baseball players together, "Monty Can't Buy Me Love," in which Homer willingly assists Mr. Burns' various flights of whimsy, and "A Hunka Hunka Burns In Love," in which Homer acts as Mr. Burns' wingman. Unsurprisingly, most incidences of Homer and Mr. Burns getting along happen when at least one of them is off the clock.
Has a Type: Seems to have a thing for Simpson or Simpson-adjacent women, having a Villainous Crush on Mona, sexually harassing Marge, and putting the moves on Jacqueline Bouvier just to troll Abe. Even Homer occasionally gets treated as a replacement sidepiece whenever Smithers is busy, with Burns calling him more fun (i.e far more willing to grovel and degrade himself), along with being “buxom and flirty”.
Hated by All: Aside from Smithers, just about everyone in Springfield hates him. In fact, in one episode where he's thought to be dead, various people showed up at his funeral just to spit on his grave, to the extent that said grave had to be drained afterwards. In the two-part episode "Who Shot Mr. Burns?", it turns out that Everyone Is a Suspect, even Smithers. He even provides the current page image.
Hero with an F in Good:
Lisa invokes this, when Burns' temporary Face–Heel Turn to environmentalism and recycling turns out to be literal, revealing that he's been farming sealife and turning it into industrial multi-purpose slurry.
Lisa: You're evil... and when you try to be good, you're even more evil!
One time he tried giving away money, to show up a Richard Branson expy, by throwing silver dollars from a hot-air balloon, causing injuries and property damage below.
Subverted when he became Fruit Batman, most of his rescues are staged but he does end up doing the right thing in the end.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: This is how he views his relationship with Smithers, much to the latter's dismay.
Hidden Depths:
He's a fan of Nancy Drew and owns every book.
For how easily distracted and generally megalomaniacal Burns is, he is shown to have enough working knowledge of how his power plant works that he can prevent a nuclear meltdown in a pinch.
Despite being laughably old and frail, he's a rather◊ impressive◊ dancer, and is implied to be at least somewhat knowledgeable about ballet.
If his outfit in "King Size Homer" is any indication, he was a male cheerleader during his time at Yale.
Multiple episodes suggest that Mr. Burns is fairly musically inclined. He mentioned playing the clavichord on "A Hunka Hunka Burns In Love," was shown playing the trumpet and the piano in "The Past and the Furious," and was taking a folk guitar class at one point in "Burns Verkaufen Der Kraftwerk."
Historical Hero Upgrade: He does this to himself in his film A Burns for All Seasons. It backfires spectacularly when the film is booed by the audience of the Springfield Film Festival.
Historical In-Joke: He is stated to be responsible for many atrocities in the history of the world such as preventing Hitler's assassination, caused the Opium War and made the French become forever rude to Americans.
Humanoid Abomination: Burns is a malevolent, heavily diseased, and deeply irradiated (to the point that he glows in the dark) old man capable of slithering through tight cracks, subsisting off of echidna milk, and recouping his wealth no matter how stupidly he squanders it.
Insistent Terminology: When the nuclear plant begins to melt down in "Homer Defined", Burns laughs off the notion that anyone would call it a meltdown: "It's one of those annoying buzzwords. We prefer to call it an 'unrequested fission surplus'" (which, in actual fact, is a "runaway chain reaction" and isn't a meltdown yet, but will become one if not dealt with pronto).
Intergenerational Friendship:
Seems to be very friendly with the child heir, Simon Woosterfield.
His relationship with Smithers, as well. Smithers is in his early forties, while Mr. Burns is anywhere between his eighties or early hundreds. Smithers even refers to him as his "best friend" in 'Brush with Greatness.'
Jerkass Has a Point: Sure, he can be challenging to even look at part of the time, but can you really blame him when he is upset at his employees when they failed to succumb to his fire drill correctly in Mountain of Madness?
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Zig-Zagged, mostly depending on what would be the funniest. Burns does frequently show a softer, more caring side, but he'll just as often subvert it with something hilariously cruel. However, some episodes do have him show a speck of bronze and sincerely Pet the Dog, the most recurring being his sincere care for Smithers.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Whenever Mr. Burns shows any sign of a softer side, he almost always ends up reverting to form by the end of the episode.
Karma Houdini: He's the character pictured with Satan on the main trope page, after all. One of the most infamous examples of his karma evasion is the end of "Homer vs. Dignity". He exploits Homer's desperation for money by making the guy into a prank monkey to the point of having him dress up as a panda that gets raped by another panda. Then he dresses up like Santa Claus and throws buckets of fish guts into the crowd during a Thanksgiving parade. Remember, Burns is the guy who took over Springfield's television stations to try to make the residents take a teddy bear from a baby in "Rosebud", made employees who quit and later retake their jobs crawl through a narrow tunnel so that they can come out with Burns looking down on them in "And Maggie Makes Three", sent vicious attack dogs after hungry children who try to steal food that Burns would have otherwise disposed of in "Bart vs. Thanksgiving", took advantage of legal loopholes that allowed him to steal from schools and wreck old folks' homes and then proceeded to block sunlight from Springfield until it took him getting SHOT for the device blocking said sunlight to be wrecked in "Who Shot Mr. Burns? (Part One)", and in "Curse of the Flying Hellfish" attempted to drown Bart for no apparent reason other than that Bart insulted him. And none of these evil deeds make any apparent dent in his prominence or power or wealth at all. Well, at least not permanent ones.
Hell, "The Fool Monty" had Burns lose his memory, and then be passed around to all the people in town to do with him as they will. It seems set up for Burns to FINALLY get his comeuppance, and for a short while he does, but he soon regains his memory, sets out to get his revenge on the entire town for what they did to him, and worst of all, near the end he tries to have a Pet the Dog moment and it very nearly kills him, revealing that the massive amounts of hatred he has and evil he causes is the only reason Burns is still alive, giving him an excuse for his former and future actions!
Karma Houdini Warranty: It's rare, but sometimes he does get some karma for his heinous acts. In particular, "Who Shot Mr. Burns" had him get shot and almost killed by Maggie, "Homer the Smithers" had Homer finally lose his temper after days of mistreatment and floor Burns with a single punch, "Burns' Heir" had Bart send him through his own trap door, and "The Old Man and the Lisa" had him lose his entire fortune for a while. It's also indicated a few times that he will eventually die, and nobody will mourn him when he does.
Karmic Butt-Monkey: Sometimes he'll be on the receiving end of misfortunes, most infamously in Who Shot Mr. Burns?, but considering how immoral he is, he always has it coming.
Kick the Dog:
Too many metaphorical examples to count, but one literal instance occurs in the fourth season episode "Last Exit To Springfield", where Mr. Burns and Smithers, after taking increasingly sensitive security measures to access a secret room in the power plant to deactivate the town's power, encounter a mangy mutt who wanders into the room through a wide-open screen door. Mr. Burns greets it appropriately.
He's "rewarded" Smithers' absolute devotion by arranging to have Smithers Buried Alive with him when he dies. While Smithers might enjoy being Together in Death with Burns when he also dies, he probably wants to live a little longer after Burns passes.
Lack of Empathy: On his best day, he doesn't care he hit a kid with his car, on his worse, he comes back to finish the job if his team doesn't win the game.
Large Ham: Even a good game of Ms. Pac-Man can get him going.
Last-Name Basis: His first name (Charles) is hardly ever used. When people wish to refer to him informally, he goes by his middle name, Monty.
Laughably Evil: Burns may be an utter bastard, but it's hard not to laugh at how over-the-top evil he is:
Burns: Men, there's a little crippled boy sitting in a hospital who wants you to win this game. I know because I crippled him myself to inspire you.
[Cut to Milhouse in a hospital stretcher with his leg in a cast]
Milhouse: I hope they win or Mr. Burns said he's coming back.
Lean and Mean: A skinny, fragile old man who is also a Bad Boss.
Lethal Chef: His attempt at baking a cake for Homer in "Scenes from the Class Struggle in Springfield" did not go well, among other things involving him using pickled figs. Smithers appropriately ends up gagging when he tries it.
Lonely at the Top: Quite possibly. Several episodes ("Homer's Night Out", "Burns' Heir", and "C.E.D'oh,") to name a few, imply that Mr. Burns occasionally regrets that his workaholic tendencies have prevented him from settling down and having a family of his own.
Burns: Simpson... I am, by most measures, a successful man. I have wealth and power beyond the dreams of you and your clock-punching ilk. (sadly) And yet... I've led a solitary life...
Long-Lived: His age varies from eighty-one to ninety to five hundred years, or if he was truly born in Pangaea as he claimed, hundreds of millions of years old.
Looks Like Orlok: He looks like Orlok even when he's not a vampire. Especially when he wriggles his fingers...
Lust Object: To Smithers, even when Burns does things he hates, Smithers still makes remark on his physique.
Manipulative Bastard: However, many seem acutely aware of Burns's evil ways so sentiments may vary here.
Mean Boss:
He's a classical stereotype. In fact, he's such a Bad Boss that he's fired Smithers — the only man who (usually) has Undying Loyalty to him — twice, once for being insufficiently toadyish.
When the worker's union asks for better medical perks, Burns tries to take away the few he's actually given them, and when they strike tries to set strike-breakers on them.
Middle Name Basis: When people call him anything but "Mr. Burns", they call him "Montgomery" or "Monty". That's his middle name, however. His first name is "Charles".
Multiple-Choice Past: Related to his Vague Age. For example, one episode had him as a soldier in the Western European front in World War II, but others indicate he was already running businesses (which traded with the Nazis) during the war. "Rosebud" has him as a child born in simple conditions, but others show him as being born into a rich family. And let's not forget that he claims to be born in Pangaea!
Narcissist: The only person Mr. Burns cares about is Mr. Burns. He always prioritizes his own desires over the wants and needs of others.
Nazi Nobleman: Implied, there are few jokes that state that Mr. Burns served with the Nazis. In n Dollar Maybe, he's confused about shooting Nazis and says that it's not how he remembered it. He owned factories that sold shells to Adolf Hitler in A Star is Burns, he foiled the assassination attempt of Hitler in Raging Abe Simpson and His Grumbling Grandson in "The Curse of the Flying Hellfish", he was shown to be a member of the Waffen-SS in "American History X-cellent", and one of his middle names, Schicklgruber (the original last name of Hitler's father), implies he is related by blood to Hitler.
Necessarily Evil: Mr. Burns needs to be evil because he can literally die if he is nice to someone.
No Celebrities Were Harmed: Matt Groening has established that he is based on oil magnate John D. Rockefeller and his grandson David Rockefeller. David Silverman, for his part, based Burns on Fox founder Barry Diller.
Non-Action Big Bad: As he's very frail and elderly and is physically weaker than a baby, most of his evil deeds are carried out by henchmen (or lawyers).
Nominal Hero: Whenever he happens to be on the same side as the good characters — which is not that often.
Oblivious to Love: He doesn't seem to notice Smithers's crush on him.
Older Than They Look: Mr Burns certainly doesn't look young, but compared to other elderly Springfield residents younger than him, he has a notable lack of wrinkles.
Only Sane by Comparison: He's a lunatic by any regard and inches away from being an outright supervillain even on his best days. However, if Smithers isn't around, Mr. Burns is usually the one playing the voice of reason when his employees are acting especially stupid.
Out-of-Character Moment:
Has had a number of these, but a particularly egregious example is the season 10 episode "Monty Can't Buy Me Love"...since when does he care about what others think of him?
"King Size Homer" is a particularly bizarre example of this trope as well. He's a Benevolent Boss throughout the entire episode and helps Homer multiple times.
Parental Substitute: It's revealed that he raised Smithers after his father died, so it could be said that they have a father/son relationship. Even if Smithers has a different type of admiration for him.
Pathetically Weak: Burns varies between being about as strong as you would expect from an old man or so weak that he has great difficulty crushing a paper cup or that a single sponge placed on his head causes him to sink into a bathtub and drown. This trait actually becomes a plot point in "Who Shot Mr. Burns" where Burns is completely unable to steal candy from baby Maggie and in the ensuing struggle, the gun he was carrying went off. The way Burns screamed "Let go of it!" as he did added to the initial assumption that it was a bigger, nastier assailant.
Pet the Dog: He has enough nice moments to remind us that he's human.
Smithers: People think because he's rich and powerful and cruel he doesn't have feelings like other men, but he does.
He let Maggie keep his beloved old teddy bear in "Rosebud."
He tended to baby Smithers after his father died in the episode "The Blunder Years."
Helped Marge in "Marge vs. Singles, Seniors, Childless Couples and Teens, and Gays." Subverted in that it's for their "supple young organs."
In "The Seemingly Never-Ending Story", he willingly pulls a Go Through Me to protect Lisa from a goat. He even gives her a hug a few moments later.
Mr. Burns: Take me, a barren, old thistle, and spare this sweet, young flower.
After Bart saved his life with a blood donation (and Smithers pointing it out to him,) he does repay his debts when people aid him directly.
He fully paid Lisa her share of the profits when she helped him regain his fortune, despite her openly stating her hatred of his methods.
He agrees to pay for liposuction to enable the more-obese-than-usual Homer slim down to his normal weight, after the latter prevented a meltdown. The original plan was to make Homer work out like he did with the other employees but Burns gave up when Homer couldn't do sit ups.
Despite his frequent abuse of Smithers, he goes above and beyond in order to gain access to some life saving medication for him. He was also grateful of that Smithers donated his kidney for him.
Burns: Smithers, don't feel so bad. After all, that kidney you donated to me really hit the spot.
In "Simpson and Delilah", He was ready to fire Homer for committing fraud with the plant's insurance to buy hair-growth medication but decided instead to give him back his old Sector 7G position note  after he expressed sympathy for Homer because he himself is also unhappy with his baldness.
In "Dancin' Homer," he sits next to Homer at a baseball game, buys him a beer, and proceeds to get pleasantly drunk with him, even putting his arm around his shoulders affably.
In "Homer the Smithers," he insists that Smithers go on vacation after having a mental breakdown. When Smithers calls him, he tells Smithers to stop worrying and just enjoy his vacation- he even shows interest in his activities. When Smithers tries to commit suicide by dunking his head in the water cooler, Burns drains all the water out of it.
In "Homer Goes to College" he ensures Homer gets an education so he can keep his job when it would be easier to fire him.
In "Burns Verkaufen der Kraftwerk", he gives Smithers his photo with him and Elvis as a parting gift when he sells the plant. When he took up beekeeping as a hobby, he named the queen of his hive after Smithers. They also go out drinking together later in the episode.
In "Burns' Heir", he's "rewarded" Smithers' years of devotion with the "honor" of Smithers being buried alive with him when he dies. Hey, at least they can be Together in Death.
For all the continual ruining of Homer (and Abe, and Mona)’s life, he agreed to eventually give a sad, hopeless kid a job as a favor to Abe and never fire him for long.
Phrase Catcher: "That's Homer Simpson sir, one of your <insert derogatory worker slang> from Sector 7G." Followed by "Simpson, eh?"
Ping Pong Naïveté:
In older episodes, he typically retained his knowledge of whichever members of the Simpson family he was interacting with for the length of an episode only. On the other hand, "Who Shot Mr. Burns" has him remembering his prior experiences with every member of Homer's family except Homer, to Homer's frustration. Following that episode, he typically remembers who Homer is, but whether he remembers the others is entirely Depending on the Writer.
Whether he's aware that Smithers is gay (and attracted to him) varies. In early episodes he tended to assume his heterosexuality in the face of much evidence to the contrary. Although Smithers officially came out to Mr. Burns in Season 27's "The Burns Cage," and Burns, while not returning his feelings, otherwise had no problem with it, he's still prone to the occasional moment of (for example) assuming Marge is Smithers' wife.
Politically Incorrect Villain:
In the earlier seasons especially, Burns was ludicrously sexist. During "The Last Temptation of Homer", he's shown to have a Brazillian soccer team working in his reactor core ("that plane crashed on my property, dammit!"), and is even willing to make ducks pull nuclear waste around, but he won't hire women until forced by the Department of Labor.
Depending on the Writer he's implied to either be a Nazi or a Nazi-sympathizer despite another episode establishing him as fighting for the US in WWII alongside Abe Simpson. He mentioned once that he build weapons for them, another had him show his "SS card" (as in "Schutzstaffel", not "Social Security"), and was disturbed by a WWII video game he was playing after finding out the soldiers he was shooting at were Germans.
The Power of Hate: This is what's keeping him alive.
Promotion to Opening Titles: In the second season, he and Smithers are added to the background at Homer's workstation. The HD intro instead moves them to the house pan shot.
Psychopathic Manchild: With his extreme selfishness and fixation on short-term gratification, he can best be described as a spoiled child in the body of an old man.
Purple Is Powerful: Impossibly wealthy and tends to gravitate towards purple in his office/home decor. The dark bottle-green suit he has worn for the majority of the show is also paired with purple socks, and he's often seen lounging in a purple dressing gown while at home.
The Quisling: Despite being a WWII veteran, several episodes imply that he's had close ties to the Nazis and even built weapons for them.
Raised by Grandparents: He was given the choice to be raised by his poor, loving parents or a heartless billionaire and he chose the latter. Said billionaire was his grandfather.
Refugee from Time: Since the mid-1990s, Mr. Burns is usually said to have grown up in the tail end of the 19th century. When this was first established, it would've put him at over 100 years old; while this is obviously longer than most people ever get to live, it's still a fairly plausible age for him to reach, especially since he could afford excellent healthcare. The thing is that Burns still seems to be a child of the late 1800s even as the show has entered the 2020s; since flashbacks suggest he has vivid memories of the era, this would probably make him the oldest person alive in-universe.
The Rich Want to Be Richer: Despite being a billionaire, Mr. Burns tends to jump at the chance to make even slightly more money.
In "Old Money", he's one of the people who lines up to make their case for Grampa to give the $106,000 Bea left him in her will to, and literally begs Grampa to give the money to him. When Grampa points out that he's already rich, Burns responds with this:
Mr. Burns: Mr. Simpson, I dread the day when $100,000 isn't worth begging for.
He also admits to this during a conversation with Homer in "Mountain of Madness":
Homer: Mr. Burns, you're the richest guy I know. Way richer than Lenny.
Mr. Burns: Oh yes. But I'd trade it all for a little more.
In "Monty Can't Buy Me Love", loveable billionaire Arthur Fortune gives out free dollar bills to those attending the opening of his latest megastore. Mr. Burns zaps Ned Flanders with a cattleprod so he can take the dollar Flanders picked up.
Running Gag:
As mentioned above, nobody ever leaves his property safely. He sics his hounds on them.
Mostly in the earlier seasons, but he repeatedly forgets who Homer is, despite repeatedly bumping into him, or being involved in his crazy adventures alongside his family.
Sadist: He's been known, out of sheer sadism, to drop certain of his employees down a seemingly bottomless trapdoor - with the express intention of killing them (although they inevitably survive).
Same Surname Means Related: Some episodes have him being related to real life celebrities called Burns;
In "Rosebud", a flashback shows that comedian George Burns is Mr. Burns' younger brother.
A flashback in The Color Yellow has Burns' grandfather mentioning that his story will one day be told by his descendants, Ric and Ken Burns.
Scatterbrained Senior: Dips his toe in and out of this trope. Sometimes he's quite clever and shrewd, but other times he seems unaware that it's not still the 19th Century, and he's never able to remember who Homer is, even after being reminded that "all the recent events of your life have revolved around him in some way". This is also played for laughs.
Screw the Rules, I Have Money!: He uses his wealth to get away with a lot of things. Except winning the Oscars.
The Scrooge: The very definition of this trope.
Burns: Anybody have change for a button?
Self-Made Orphan: Attributes the cause of his parents' death to getting in his way (though given he was raised by his grandparents and his mother is still alive, he might be talking about them).
A Sinister Clue: He's an evil Corrupt Corporate Executive, and "When Flanders Failed" reveals that he's left-handed.
Soft-Spoken Sadist: His voice is soft, breathy, and elegant-sounding (it was based on Lionel Barrymore and Ronald Reagan), and is one of, if not the most evil character on the show.
Sole Survivor: He inherited his fortune after his older siblings died under mysterious circumstances, he's also the semi-final surviving member of The Flying Hellfish until Abe expelled him for attempted murder.
Stalker with a Crush: To Marge, when she was his employee.
Strong as They Need to Be: He is always depicted as being incredibly weak and frail, but it's often exaggerated by the Rule of Funny with things like him being overpowered by an insect or being unable to lift a sponge.
Time Abyss: His birthplace was Pangaea, which would make him at least 170 million years old. However, his age is very inconsistent due to Depending on the Writer and Negative Continuity.
Too Important to Remember You: Especially in the early seasons, he constantly forgets the names of employees like Homer's and has to be reminded by Smithers.
Took a Level in Jerkass: His villainy goes into this level when he does things like block out the sun or trying to kill a child.
Tragic Villain: He was a Cheerful Child, but his grandfather, a cruel and insensitive man, was the reason why he is the man we know today. He lured him away from his loving parents and forcibly adopted Burns. There's also the loss of his teddy bear, Bobo, but that may or may not have actually contributed to it.
Tranquil Fury: Barely raises his voice when he is angry.
Tyrannical Town Tycoon: Whether it's played straight or for laughs varies, but Mr. Burns is typically portrayed as having a monopoly over the town's economy and uses it to be above the law.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: The relationship between Homer, Abe and Mr. Burns is really dark the more you look into it. It starts with Burns getting carried by Abe through the war; he then unknowingly becomes Abe’s biggest fan when he was a wrestler. His vindictive power and wealth scares Mona into leaving her family. As well as fractured the relationship between Abe and Homer when Abe was forced to give Bongo away. Homer’s life has been ruined in many ways by Mr. Burns yet he ironically grows up to work for him. All of this gets acknowledged in “Shoddy Heat”, as while he’s responsible for so much of Homer’s past and present trauma (Homer’s still mad at him for getting him raped by a panda), he also made a deal with Abe to give his son a Status Quo Is God job.
Used to Be a Sweet Kid: Until he (almost literally) dropped everything for money.
Downplayed in certain episodes/comics, where he's shown to not have been all that nice as a child, either.
Vague Age: He has personally stated his age as 81 years, but Skinner and Homer later separately refer to him as being 104. Compounding matters, he was old enough to be twenty-five years out of Yale in the fifties, while in World War 2 Abe Simpson is clearly several decades older than him. Later episodes have implied his age to be in the thousands or even the millions. Smithers tells him his ATM code is his age (We hear Burns enter a four-digit number, and the first one definitely wasn’t a 0) and he has stated his birthplace to be Pangaea.
Vile Villain, Saccharine Show: Especially in the earlier seasons. Freudian Excuse aside, his Kick the Dog moments are much more frequent than those of other Simpsons villains. The few excuses he is given seem so disconnected from his evil, he is hated throughout Springfield, ("Who Shot Mr. Burns" has even Snake Jailbird apologizing for not being around to shoot him).
Villain Decay: Later seasons tend to depict Burns as little more than a feeble, old man who's hopelessly behind the times and cannot function at all without Smithers, whereas in the earlier seasons he was a powerful Corrupt Corporate Executive despite his physical frailty.
Villainous Crush: One time Marge got a job at the nuclear plant and Mr. Burns developed a thing for her.
Villains Out Shopping:
Invokes this during a lull in one of his schemes, when he finished talking with Lisa in his office. Lisa says she can't leave right away because she is waiting for her ride home. He tries to break the silence by making small talk and asking what she thinks about today's music. When she responds that she thinks it distracts people from more important social issues, he irritatedly comments;
Burns: *Sighs* My god, are you always on?
It should be noted that he does enjoy shopping with Smithers.
He can sometimes get pretty chummy with Homer outside of work; such as in "Dancin' Homer," "Monty Can't Buy Me Love," and "A Hunka Hunka Burns In Love."
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Smithers though the Vitriolic part is entirely on his part with Smithers just taking it.
Vocal Evolution: Back in season 1 when Christopher Collins voiced him, his voice was more demanding, loud and raspy. When Harry Shearer took over, he initially did a more energetic replica of Collins, though around Seasons Four and Five, his voice became softer and sinister. Around Season 34, his voice started to sound a bit raspier, due to Harry Shearer's advanced age.
Weak, but Skilled: In recent seasons, the "skilled" part has been downplayed, but in several episodes over the years he is shown to be both ruthlessly cunning and physically fragile.
Wealthy Yacht Owner: Has one that Homer uses while house-sitting and gets attacked by Ruthless Modern Pirates.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: The episode "Last Exit to Springfield" implies that the reason why he wanted to end the Nuclear Worker's Union was because they were getting corrupt, based on something an atom worker said when he was with his grandfather.
Wicked Wastefulness: Burns is comically miserly toward his employees, but lives an incredibly wealthy life full of frivolous luxuries. In one episode, it's shown that rather than make his bed, he has it incinerated and gets a new one delivered every day
Would Hurt a Child: He has hurt Bart on several occasions with "Bart Gets Hit By A Car" and "Lady Bouvier's Lover" being prime examples of this. He also had a tendency to dump nuclear waste in parks. He only stopped because the number of bald children was getting suspicious. He also implied he kidnaps kids for their organs.
You Are Fat: Burns insults Homer's attempt at losing weight in "Brush With Greatness" by calling him the "fattest thing he's ever seen", which completely shatters his self-confidence in one fell swoop. That's the point where Marge decides there's no inner beauty in Burns and kicks him out of the house.