Accidental Innuendo: In-universe, a semi-recurring gag is for Skinner to make particularly egregious innuendoes with complete seriousness and sincerity.
"Well, if by 'wank' you mean 'educational fun', then stand back, it's wanking time!"
"You leave tomorrow for our state-wide Model UN, so this is our last chance to bone up. And bone we will!"
Alliterative Name: Seymour Skinner.
Ambiguously Bi: On one occasion it is implied that he made a pass at his commanding officer during his service in 'Nam. He also has a bit of Ho Yay in his Like an Old Married Couple interactions with Chalmers, to the point that the two were once Mistaken for Gay.
The Artifact: Principal Skinner being heavily established as a veteran of The Vietnam War. In the 80s and 90s, most Vietnam War veterans were middle-aged Baby Boomers, so a stern school principal having this backstory would make perfect sense. However, today, most Vietnam war veterans are retired and/or in their 60s and 70s, so a man Skinner's age would likely have been a small child during the war, or not even born yet.
Basement Dweller: Downplayed since he does have a job, though it's a rather thankless one. That said, he is in his 40s, lives with his mother, and lets her control his life (though he insists that she lives with him despite flashbacks showing otherwise).
Belligerent Sexual Tension: With Edna until she broke up with him, married Flanders and pretty much forgot about Seymour.
The Bore: He's an incredible buzz-kill on his own (witness him boring the living hell out of the Springfield Police when he's trying to recall where he was when Mr. Burns got shot), but when it comes to dealing with kids (and specially Bart) he can get militant about it. To give some examples:
On "Bart Gets Famous", he brings all of the kids in Springfield Elementary on a tour of a box factory (and Krabappel explicitly says that this is not the first time he's done this, or maybe that this is the only thing he can think of doing). The only other person that shows interest in being there is Martin Prince.
In the second part of "Who Shot Mr. Burns?" after interrogating Tito Puente (who made a pretty cool mambo musical sequence), Wiggum hopes that the remaining suspects are as cool. Gilligan Cut to Skinner boring the Springfield Policemen to tears and borderline sleep by hemming and hawing for Heaven only knows how long as he tries to recall what happened on that day.
In "Skinner's Sense of Snow", all of the drama of the episode occurs because Skinner absolutely refuses to close down Springfield Elementary during a day of heavy snow, even if that meant the students nearly get killed on the bus ride through the extremely slippery roads and regardless of the fact that there were no teachers at all to provide lessons (because they used the day to party). Because there were no teachers, the only thing Skinner can think of doing is putting on an utterly, despairingly horribly bad Christmas film (and he's the only one who enjoys it), and the school ends up snowed in and the students will miss Christmas as a result (and Skinner organizes things so they can "survive" the event, which means going full-blown Drill Sergeant Nasty and not letting anyone try to find a way out).
"The Principal and the Pauper" shows that Skinner likes to have his silhouette drawn with his mother on a regular basis. It's said in another episode that he enjoys the school's hearing tests.
Boss's Unfavorite Employee: Chalmers is far harsher on him than just about anybody else. For the most part, the Superintendent's willing to put up with a lot (though he does have his limits, like physically abusing students or getting blackout drunk on the job), but he's shown to have very little patience for Skinner and his antics. In a couple of episodes it's even strongly implied that Chalmers has no problem whatsoever with Skinner getting killed by whatever mess he's in right now.
Butt-Monkey: A pathetic mama's boy who is usually easily outsmarted by Bart and put down upon by his boss.
Characterization Marches On: In the early seasons, he was far more competent and authoritative, and his main shtick was a tendency to mispronounce long words (including his own surname), have flashbacks about his days as a Vietnam War soldier and demonstrate his Green Beret skills, such as taking out a group of lawyers from The Disney Corporation who threatened to sue Skinner over using "The Happiest Place on Earth" for the school carnival. The writers kept the 'Nam flashbacks (though those got phased out as well as time went on), but ditched his penchant for mispronouncing long words, and eventually made him a loser who always fell for Bart's tricks, while his increased Momma's Boy characterization stripped away most of his authoritative traits.
Clueless Boss: Is frequently portrayed this way. An example of this occurs in "New Kid on The Block" where Jimbo is lifting Bart's head inside a toilet bowl, while Skinner just waits outside and buys Jimbo's incredibly paper-thin excuse.
The Comically Serious: Much of Skinner's humor comes from his deep authoritative voice, which makes everything he says, no matter how silly, sound like a command.
Reporter: Principal Skinner, you've been referred to as "the funny one". Is that reputation justified?
Skinner: (seriously) Yes. Yes, it is. (crowd laughs)
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: It's hard to believe that a momma's boy like him trained as a Green Beret, taking out Disney's lawyers and hired goons to avoid being sued for using "The Happiest Place on Earth" for the school carnival.
Dean Bitterman: He can be one of these in his less sympathetic moments. In several episodes he schemes to get rid of things like the music program and razes the school's pool and gym, and once tried to enforce the use of uniforms for various reasons such as personal trauma or thinking he can cut budget corners that way or trying to increase discipline, but for the most part (especially comparatively recently) he does it just because he wants to kill any kind of joy the kids could have from coming to school... just because.
Determinator: Once parodied The Gunslinger from Westworld. See "Non-Giving-Up School Guy".
Disproportionate Retribution: In the early seasons, he would give Bart several months/years of detention for anything he did wrong, even when it wasn't that big of a deal.
Enemy Mine: Episodes like "Lisa Gets An A" occasionally have him team up with Bart to help pull off a Zany Scheme.
Everyone Has Standards:
The teachers can do a lot to children (mostly crush their self-esteem and bore them with inane lessons), but lay a hand on them (like Otto did in "The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer" and Mrs. Krabappel did in "The Nedliest Catch") and you're done.
He'll crush his students' spirits and tell them they have no future, but he thought Superintendent Chalmers calling them ugly was uncalled for.
When he finds out that Agnes stopped him from going to a school he wanted, he displays some semblance of the spine towards her until she apologises.
Extreme Doormat: He's obsessed with being the "perfect son" for his mother Agnes and not capable of saying NO to her. One episode even had him win an award for being the biggest doormat in Springfield and was represented in said scene with a doormat with a picture of his face on it.
Flanderization: Early appearances had him mainly as a reasonably competent, no-nonsense principal who was a Vietnam veteran and had an overbearing mother. He even managed to be pretty badass in a few episodes ("The Boy Who Knew Too Much" is probably one of the few times in the show where Bart is actually pants-wettingly afraid of his wrath). After a few seasons, he became a pathological mama's boy (who was even able to once convince Springfield that he was a virgin in his 40's, though this was a lie to deflect from accusations of improper conduct with Edna Krabappel) and merely embarrassed himself whenever he tried to assert authority over Bart or any other students, and pursued absurd schemes to kill any possible joy the kids could have at school just because.
Former Teen Rebel: Was a worse prankster than Bart in his youth.
Friendly Enemy: In spite of being at each other's throats, Bart and Skinner have cared for, helped, and supported their foe so many times in each other's darkest hour that they are best friends in all but name.
Hidden Depths:
Shown to be a big fan of Star Wars in "Lisa's Rival", where he names Ralph the winner of a diorama competition for simply bringing a complete set of limited edition Star Wars action figures featuring Skinner's favorite characters.
Attempts to show some in "Sweet Seymour Skinner's Baadasssss Song" by planning to write the next great American novel. However, his idea, the atrociously named Billy and the Cloneasaurus, is a beat-for-beat copy of Jurassic Park (due to apparent Pop-Cultural Osmosis Failure), which Apu of all people viciously excoriates him over. The idea isn't brought up again.
Hope Crusher: He believes the children of Springfield have no future and has no problem bringing down their spirits for the sake of maintaining discipline and moulding them for a future life of mediocrity and conformism.
Implacable Man: Skinner is an ex-Green Beret and he's impossible to stop when he puts his mind to something. When Bart skips school, Skinner quite relentlessly hunts him down with Bart being unable to shake him and shocked at Skinner being such a "non-giving up guy."
Jerkass Ball: Though he is a nice enough guy, he's also very capable of being a jerk.
Karma Houdini Warranty: In "Special Edna" (Season 14, ep. 7), after Skinner cancelled a movie date with Ms. Krabappel to spend time with his mother, Bart nominates Edna Krabappel for a "Teacher of the Year" award. Ms. K and the Simpsons go to Orlando and attend the fictitious EFCOT theme park, a parody of EPCOT. Skinner, worried that Edna might leave him and the school behind, blackmails Bart into Obfuscating Stupidity against his will; when Bart is asked what Ms. Krabappel can teach the world, he pretends to be illiterate, until Skinner confesses that Bart's Obfuscating Stupidity was his idea, and in spite of Skinner costing her the award, she accepts his marriage proposal. But in "My Big Fat Geek Wedding" Skinner gets cold feet before the wedding and Ms. Krabappel leaves him stranded at the altar and starts dating Comic Book Guy, ultimately rejecting Comic Book Guy's and Skinner's proposals by the episode's end.
Late to the Punchline: He's often slow to pick up on jokes, particularly dirty Double Entendre, if he even picks up on them at all.
Lawful Pushover: He has allowed a lot of awful, flat-out atrocious things to affect his students either because the school laws allow it, the PTA will get enraged if he tries to put his foot down, he thinks it still hasn't gotten too far out of hand, or there's just not enough budget to fix it (and he may have even allowed it because it means more money for the school). Depending on the Writer, it's him being either an Extreme Doormat, a Well-Intentioned Extremist, or just a jerk.
Malaproper: He was quite prone to these in his early appearances:
Skinner: Welcome kindergarteners, I'm Principal Sinner— Skinner! (kindergarteners laugh) Well, that's it. I've lost them forever.
Manchild: Zig-zagged. Even though Skinner lives with his mother and is treated like a child by her, he still behaves in a mature manner as a 40-year-old school principal.
Meaningful Name: Shares a surname with B.F. Skinner, a scientist who didn't believe in free will and invented the field of operant conditioning to educate people. Apt, for a fairly stern letter-of-the-law type who runs a school.
Mistaken for Prank Call: Played with, as whenever Bart tries to prank call him, it backfires.
Skinner: Well, as a matter of fact, my refrigerator wasn't running. You've spared me quite a bit of spoilage: thank you, anonymous young man.
Bart: D'oh!
Momma's Boy: Constantly kowtows to his mother.
Multiple-Choice Past: He has several different stories about how he got captured as a POW during the Vietnam War and his time during his imprisonment.
My Beloved Smother: Trope Namer; he lives with, and is co-dependent with, his mom.
Skinner: She lives with me!
Mysterious Middle Initial: His diploma in "Who Shot Mr. Burns? Part One" gave his name as "W. Seymour Skinner", just for the sake of adding him to the list of suspects that have for initials either WS or MS. What the "W" stands for is unknown and it's never mentioned again.
The Neidermeyer: During his Vietnam days, he commanded about as much respect from his troops as he does from the students at Springfield Elementary. He was once shot in the back during a Bob Hope special while trying to get Joey Heatherton to put some pants on.
Never My Fault: In "Pokey Mom", he reprimands Jack Crowley for the bold art he made for the mural, basically saying it is kid unfriendly, and forces him to make a Stylistic Suck drawing he put together on a napkin. When that understandably blows and Chalmers chews Skinner out, Skinner says "This isn't what I wanted! Where is the boldness?" and starts putting down Jack again when he points out it was Skinner's idea, sending Jack over the edge and effectively ruining an ex-con's shot at redemption.
Nice Guy: Mainly after Season 4, be even beforehand he's usually sensible, polite, passive and good-natured.
Nice Job Breaking It, Hero!: Even when Bart genuinely tries to change his ways, Skinner then simply screws him over For the Evulz. Which, considering that Bart's his worst nightmare made flesh, is not wise.
Non-Giving-Up School Guy: He once tracked Bart across Springfield (even climbing a cliff and walking straight through a river after Bart cut the rope bridge over it) to get him back to class. Bart, upon seeing this (in one of the few times he's been flat-out afraid of Skinner), gives us the Buffy Speak Trope Namer line. On many other episodes, it is played for dark comedy or drama — he is perfectly willing and able to risk the students' lives rather than allow them any kind of slacking off.
Non-Standard Character Design: His ears are drawn more realistically compared to most of the other characters.
Noodle Incident:
Skinner: I've been hoping I could find something that would be named after me.
Bart: And you've never found anything?
Skinner: Once. But by the time I got to the phone, my discovery had already been reported by Principal Kohoutek. [Darkly] I got back at him, though ... him and that little boy of his.
Obsessed with Perfect Attendance: "Skinner's Sense of Snow" reveals that Principal Skinner will keep school open under any circumstances, even a waist-high snow day. He proudly calls his attendance streak "Cal Ripken-like" and when the students get snowed in the school, admits he was going to spend his winter break there anyway.
Obsessively Normal: He's typically portrayed as someone who actively embraces mediocrity, both to make his job easier and because he is an incredibly boring person.
Odd Friendship: With Bart during "Sweet Skinner's Badasssss Song".
Permanent Placeholder: In-Universe. He had pretty much taken over Bart's class since Mrs. Krabappel's death. There had been attempts to introduce an actual replacement teacher, but until Ned Flanders came along, none of them had stuck.
Phrase Catcher:
Chalmers: SKINN-ER!!!
Skinner: S-Superintendent Chalmers!
Agnes Skinner: Seymour!
Plot Allergy: "Please Homer, Don't Hammer 'Em" reveals that Skinner is allergic to peanuts, something that had never even been suggested previously.
Pop-Cultural Osmosis Failure: In "Please Homer, Don't Hammer 'Em", Skinner fails to get the reference when Comic Book Guy mentions Bart finding his Kryptonite, only understanding that it must be a mineral due to the use of the suffix "-ite".
Professional Butt-Kisser: Tries his absolute damnedest to be one of these to Superintendent Chalmers. The joke then becomes that Skinner does incredibly stupid things because he thinks they will please Chalmers, but they piss him off instead (examples include instantly explaining who is "Who" in their attempt at telling a Who's on First? joke in "Screaming Yellow Honkers", and trying to pass off Krusty Burgers as "Steamed Hams" because he doesn't wants Chalmers to know he screwed up his attempt at making lunch).
Promotion to Opening Titles: He gets added to the house pan shot in the HD intro.
Purple Is Powerful: Some earlier episodes depict him with a purple suit instead of his iconic blue one, and even after the show decided on a color scheme for their characters, you can still see a purple shirt underneath said suit.
Reasonable Authority Figure: Depending on the Writer, he can also be an Obstructive Bureaucrat, but he is usually a well-meaning (if nerdy) principal constrained by excessive budget cuts and apathetic teachers.
Refugee from Time: Is still a Vietnam vet, even though by now, he should be as old as Grampa was at the start of the show!
Retcon: His real identity as Armin Tanzarian is never brought up again, and it goes so far as to rewrite past events to include Seymour in them all and not the real one. This doesn't stop Lisa from getting on his nerves by making an off-hand mention about it much later in the show's run, which means it's not entirely forgotten.
Retired Badass: Former army sergeant. He also mentions in one episode that he's an ex-Green Beret (US Army Special Forces) and puts the skills to good use taking out a lawyer and his two goons.
Skinner: Copyright expired.
Screw the Money, I Have Rules!: Gives Bart detention for trying to bribe him.
Self-Fulfilling Prophecy: His attempts to toady to Super Intendant Chalmers to appease just lend to Chalmers hating his guts, since Skinner never takes the hint that Chalmers hates Professional Butt Kissers. The one time Chalmers finally fired Skinner, he made apparent it was only because Skinner's skulking got on his nerves, he couldn't care less if his replacement was even more incompetent than him.
Shell-Shocked Veteran: Parodied. Frequently has flashbacks to his experiences in Vietnam and being a POW, which vary from "sincerely terrible", to "exaggerated for comedy" (the infamous "my platoon were eaten by a Viet Cong elephant" flashback) to "honestly not terrible" (the famous "thin stew"... made up of fish, prawns, vegetables and four kinds of rice in coconut milk and which he greatly enjoyed and his trauma came from not being able to find it in the US).
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Skinner and Bart's rivalry is the stuff of Springfield legends. The two are always at odds, competing, and Skinner's mission is to catch him when he misbehaves. Under it, they have a healthy dost of respect for one another.
Skewed Priorities: In the Steamed Hams sketch in 22 Short Films About Springfield, he apparently considers it more important to make sure that Chalmers doesn't suspect anything about him than to worry about his house being on fire.
Spock Speak: Skinner has an overly precise, formal, and clinical way of speaking; he never uses a short, simple word when a longer one is available, and he tends to say such lines in a stiff, stilted manner. As examples, he claimed that newspapers contain "much-needed roughage and essential inks," responded to being pantsed by announcing that his "trousers have descended," and hoped that a visiting Superintendent Chalmers is "prepared for an unforgettable luncheon." As this blog post points out, Skinner's way of speaking is simultaneously intelligent, because it uses long, intellectual-sounding words, and stupid because people don't really talk like that.
Stern Teacher: He has it in for Bart Simpson, but it's hard to blame him when you realize just what Bart's put him through for so long. He's generally a lot nicer to the other students, and can even be civil to Bart when the latter isn't pranking him.
Teeny Weenie: Implied in the episode "Bart Gets a Z". Mrs. Krabappel gets drunk after Bart spikes her coffee, a later scene showing a school newspaper with the headline "Tipsy Teacher Mars Assembly, Reveals Size of Principal's Wang" and a photograph of Krabappel making a hand gesture blatantly suggesting that Skinner's penis size is unimpressive.
That Came Out Wrong: "This is our last chance to bone up. And bone we will!" (In this case, he doesn't catch the unintentional innuendo, but the kids do.) After the kids trap him in the dodgeball sack and the class hamster Nibbles helps rescue them, he says "Good work, Nibbles! Now chew through my ballsack!" The hamster gives him a disgusted expression, then runs away.
Trademark Favorite Food: Invoked in the season 7 episode Team Homer, where Skinner reminisces that during his time as a prisoner of war in Vietnam, he lived on a "thin" stew made of fish, prawns, vegetables, coconut milk and four different kinds of rice. note  He subsequently adds that he tried to find restaurants that would serve it in the States for years and nearly went mad from the effort, because he couldn't find anyone who could get the spices right, which suggests that he became quite taken with it.
Trading Bars for Stripes: Chose to serve in Vietnam rather than do time. He didn't knew there was a war going on, though, otherwise he would have taken the third option of apologizing to the woman he snatched the purse from and gotten away scot-free.
Trauma Button: Surprisingly, Valentine's Day turns out to send him into a PTSD meltdown. Bart's Valentine's Day sees Skinner flashback to his friend Johnny's death in Vietnam and break down screaming his name over the loudspeaker.
Bart: Cool, I broke his brain!
Unknown Rival: To Flanders in regards to their attraction to Edna. Chalmers, though, snarks that it's like a man (Flanders) fighting a can of dog food (Skinner).
The Vietnam Vet: He served in the Vietnam War as a Green Beret. The conflict clearly traumatized him, as demonstrated by his occasional mental slips.
Vitriolic Best Buds: While in earlier seasons Chalmers clearly disliked Skinner, recent episodes have portrayed the two of them as close friends, even though Chalmers still frequently insults and berates him. In fact, "The Road to Cincinnati" has Chalmers admit that he actually likes Skinner deep down.
Vocal Evolution: His voice sounds much deeper in the earlier seasons.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: His plan to cut Springfield Elementary's expenses in "The President Wore Pearls" consists of cutting art, physical education and music from the curriculum and framing student president Lisa.
Worthy Opponent: Bart clearly respects Skinner for his integrity and devotion to his school's children, while Skinner for his part is warmly reminded of his happy and reckless boyhood in Bart. They are enemies on principal, but are best friends in all but name.