Adaptational Villainy: In the show, Smithers isn't much more than a Yes-Man serving a Corrupt Corporate Executive. In the arcade game, he robbed a jewelry store, wore a cape filled with bombs, and was prone to evil laughter. Also doubles as Adaptational Badass.
Affably Evil: While capable of jealousy and surprising viciousness, Smithers is an otherwise hardworking and genial majordomo who just happens to work for the most evil man in town.
Aloof Leader, Affable Subordinate: Has this dynamic with Mr. Burns. While Mr. Burns is one of the most reprehensible villains in the show, Smithers is generally friendly and mild-mannered enough to get along pretty well with most of the plant employees. Deconstructed in "The Bottle Episode", where he worries if carrying out evil acts for Burns means he's actually worse, because he has morality and Burns doesn't.
All Gays Love Theater: Wrote and starred in a Malibu Stacy musical.
Ambiguously Gay: Early episodes strongly hinted he was gay without directly saying it but it's common knowledge now.
Ancestral Name: His name is Waylon Smithers Jr., after his father Waylon Smithers Sr.
Animal Motifs: In the future scene at the end of "Rosebud" he's shown as a robot dog, fitting since he's always been Mr. Burns' loyal lapdog.
Anti-Villain: He just follow Burns in most of his evil schemes, even though he doesn't like most of them.
Armoured Closet Gay: In earlier seasons, Smithers was indicated to be gay until it became a running joke that Smithers would try to deny his feelings for his boss or hide his sexuality in front of others.
Battle Butler: In the arcade game.
Beard of Sorrow:
He grows a five o'clock shadow when he believes he shot Mr. Burns. He is clean-shaven again at the end of the episode.
When Mr. Burns orders Homer be beaten to a pulp, Smithers becomes so stressed out that he stops shaving and looks haggard from the stress.
Beleaguered Assistant: Whenever Burns does something ill-advised out of boredom, revenge, or for a quick buck, which occurs roughly once or twice a season.
Benevolent Boss: In addition to being Mr. Burns' assistant, Smithers also acts as a supervisor/disciplinarian to the other employees. Unlike his boss, he's a Reasonable Authority Figure who doesn't unnecessarily or unfairly punish the employees under him, nor does he forego sincerely complimenting or rewarding an employee when they've earned it.
Big Ol' Eyebrows: One of the few characters with these, they give him a more expressive look.
Butt-Monkey: Smithers gets a lot of badgering and punishment from Burns.
Catchphrase: "That's Homer Simpson, sir. One of your (nickname) from sector 7G"
Characterization Marches On:
Aside from being black in "Homer's Odyssey", a deleted line in "Blood Feud" has him mentioning going home to his wife and kids.
"Simpson and Delilah" and some other early episodes depicted him as a more petty and conniving Middle-Management Mook with him and Homer having something of a vendetta. He is even depicted as a manic criminal in the 1991 arcade game. "Blood Feud" showed Smithers as extremely grateful to Homer for saving Burns' life, suggesting that his vindictiveness against Homer in "Simpson and Delilah" was more due to Homer's threatening his status as Burns' chief lackey. As long as Homer or anyone else isn't actually threatening his position, Smithers is largely indifferent to them unless they're stifling Burns or being a genuine nuisance. Seasons Two and Three generally developed Smithers' more sympathetic personality, usually only committing evil under Burns' orders.
"Portrait of a Lackey on Fire" ends with Smithers using puzzles to keep Mr. Burns too preoccupied to carry out his evil schemes. Oddly, this does seem to be one of the most effective strategies against Burns in the history of the series.
During "Brush with Greatness," he's pretty quick to laugh along with Burns when the latter mocks Homer for his weight and makes Simpson cry. Later episodes, even in that same season, characterizing Smithers more as a Nice Guy who has no quarrel with Homer (and also not willing to go along with everything Burns does 100% of the time) make this moment seem uncharacteristically nasty on his part.
Cigarette of Anxiety:
He doesn't smoke very much, but he's shown doing so when he's particularly upset. Examples include "Who Shot Mr. Burns", when he goes on a bender after being fired by Burns; "Homer The Smithers" when he's desperate to find a temporary replacement as Burns's assistant who won't outshine him; and "Sideshow Bob Roberts", where he's clearly torn between having to go behind Burns's back to get Sideshow Bob removed as Mayor of Springfield, and what Bob's mayoralty could mean for himself and other gays.
He's seen chain-smoking in "Blood Feud," when he's sitting at his desk and anxiously speaking to one of Mr. Burns' hired goons about Burns wanting Homer to be beaten to a pulp.
Closet Gay: He'll probably still be secretly pining for Mr. Burns when the universe reaches its heat death. Several episodes indicate that he's active in Springfield's gay community when he's off the clock, though. He was also visibly disgusted when he found himself in a strip club.
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: Often this to Burns when he has Scatterbrained Senior tendencies, and Smithers needs to remind him who Homer is.
The Comically Serious: Straight-laced, level-headed, soft-spoken, and takes his job (or any job he's given,) very seriously. This greatly contrasts him with his lunatic of a boss and the woefully incompetent workforce of the plant, especially Homer.
The Confidant: He gives Mr. Burns advice when feels it's his place to, he listens to his troubles, and even gives him a shoulder to cry on if need be.
Crazy Jealous Guy: Should someone get too close to Burns, Smithers can get surprisingly vindictive. He went to elaborate lengths to ruin Homer's career after Burns promoted him to an executive and shown great approval of him. In one of the comics, when Homer won him in a poker game, he wasted no time forcing Marge out of his life. On the other hand, if anyone goes out of their way to help Burns (in "Blood Feud") or otherwise maintain Smithers' relationship with him (in "Homer The Smithers"), Smithers can be extremely thankful and kind.
Cure Your Gays: His parents tried to turn him straight by making him go to a burlesque house and in an episode set in the future, he has to take anti-gay injections every 10 minutes.
Deadpan Snarker: When annoyed by the antics of the plant employees, (or even his boss, on occasion,) he will not bother to conceal it under a spectacularly flat, sarcastic affect. His expressive eyebrows also make him one hell of a Silent Snarker.
Depending on the Artist: Early on, the artists were a bit inconsistent on how thick his glasses should be, going from thin to having a very large frame. Thin eventually won out.
Desperately Needs Orders: Smithers's servitude to Burns is almost a psychological need. In "Homer the Smithers," when Burns tells Smithers to take a much-needed vacation, he begs to stay, claiming that without Burns, he'll "wither and die." Even while on vacation, he repeatedly calls Burns asking if he has any mail that needs opening.
The Dragon: Depending on whether Burns is on the good or bad side of the episode's events.
Early Installment Character-Design Difference: Smithers had black skin, blue hair and wore a white coat in his debut episode, "Homer's Odyssey".
Everyone Has Standards: Though usually a bit of a doormat to Burns, some of the schemes Burns comes up with will have Smithers objecting to them at the risk of losing his own job.
He can't bring himself to allow Homer to be beaten up after he saves Burns' life.
Bart owes his life to Smithers refusing to let Burns leave him for dead after Burns hit him with his car.
In the movie he tries to spare Apu, Wiggum and Hibbert from harm by warning them that trying to appeal to Burns' better nature is an awful idea.
"Bottle Episode" has him wanting to break free of doing evil tasks for Burns, and wonders if he's just as bad as he is.
Despite being a Yes-Man sycophant to the man, even Smithers balks at how “unconscionably evil” Burns has become in “Who Shot Mr. Burns?”, to the point where he actually QUITS his job.
Among the examples listed in this episode is his clear distaste with Burns tapping into the oil well that rightfully belongs to Springfield Elementary, even willfully ignoring a sexual innuendo Burns made about the theft.
Also, despite usually aiding Burns in his endeavors, not even Smithers is willing to go along with the latter’s plan to block out the sun.
Extreme Doormat: Most of the time, he's this to Mr. Burns, often doing whatever Burns asks him to do, even at his own expense.
Flat Character: Prior to his character development, he was identified as Mr. Burns' right hand man who was a closeted homosexual with strong feelings for his boss. Over time, he grew into his own character and was more expressive with his sexuality, even trying to date outside of the begging Burns for affection.
Flat Joy: Possesses a low, soft voice with monotonous inflection, and very rarely raises his voice. Thus, when experiencing great moments of joy (or any emotion, really,) regardless of facial expression, his dialogue is usually delivered with the same flat affect.
Friendly Enemy: While Burns often plays an antagonistic role to the Simpsons or Springfield as a whole, Smithers never fails to be friendly or at least professional to them and people as a whole, particularly while he's off the clock or even while he's still on it. The feeling is mutual; while the family doesn't care for Mr. Burns, they seem to be on good terms with Smithers.
Friend to All Children: Downplayed. While he does assist Mr. Burns in hiding nuclear waste in public areas, among other schemes, he's pretty friendly towards Bart and Lisa, a direct contrast to how his boss acts towards children. He's also pretty friendly and peppy around the kids who visit the plant during a field trip in "Homer's Odyssey." A supplemental promotional advertisement for "Who Shot Mr. Burns" once described Smithers as being "good with kids."
He was happy to help Lisa track down the creator of Malibu Stacy in "Lisa Vs. Malibu Stacy".
Gay Conservative: Supplemental material has stated that Smithers is a Log Cabin Republican, though he doesn't approve of Sideshow Bob's ultra-conservative views.
Gay Cowboy:
In "El Viaje Misterioso De Nuestro Jomer", he shows up at the chili festival wearing a pink and white cowboy outfit with a neon sign on the back saying "Hot Nashville Nights".
In The Simpson Family Smile-Time Variety Hour segment of "The Simpsons Spin Off Showcase", he dresses as a cowboy and sings about whipping it good with a liquorice whip.
Generation Xerox: His father looked very similar to him and had the same job.
He also greatly resembles his mother◊.
Green-Eyed Monster: Occasionally, whenever Homer or someone else gains Mr. Burns's favor (such as in "Simpson and Delilah").
The Glomp: He has a tendency to clamp onto people during emotionally charged moments. Examples include "Blood Feud," when he gratefully gives Bart a big hug when the boy agrees to donate blood to a sick Mr. Burns, and again in the same episode, when he bursts into tears and hugs one of Burns' hired goons, as he tells him that Homer helped save Mr. Burns' life. In a deleted "Who Shot Mr. Burns" scene, he gives Mr. Burns a big hug when his boss wakes up from his coma.
Hidden Depths: In "Bottle Episode," he admits that he feels intense guilt about all he's done to aid and abet Mr. Burns and his Corrupt Corporate Executive friends, and works with Marge to scam them out of some money which they can use to do good.
In a more humorous example, he's shown to be remarkably skilled at playing the banjo in "Blood Feud." This skill seems to carry over to the "Simpsons Sing The Blues" album; during the breakdown of "Look At All Those Idiots," Mr. Burns orders him to play a guitar solo, and it's quite an impressive one.
Ignored Enamored Underling: He's madly in love with his boss, who doesn't reciprocate.
Incompatible Orientation: He's infatuated with Mr. Burns despite the latter being (most likely) heterosexual and having numerous romances. Smithers is madly in love with him and often tries to confess his feelings for him.
Last-Name Basis: Rarely referred to by his first name, Waylon.
Likes Older Men:
A gay example. Smithers is hopelessly in love with Burns, who's old enough to be his grandfather. Most episodes depict Smithers as being in his early 40s, while Burns's most common age is 104.
In a humorous example, Smithers is shown flirting◊ with a mall Santa in the Christmas Advent calendar opening.
His boyfriend during "Portrait of a Lackey On Fire" is a similarly old-aged man who borders on being a Silver Fox.
Love Martyr: A one-sided example. Mr. Burns clearly sees him as nothing more than his servant and treats him callously to boot, but regardless Smithers is madly in love with him an devoted to his duties as his assistant.
Momma's Boy: Burns mentions that Smithers is close to his mother. In "Homer Defined," when Smithers is describing what he did over the weekend, he mentions writing a letter to his mother. And in "Moho House," he's shown happily giving his mother a birthday present.
Morality Pet: It has been shown that for as much of an Ungrateful Bastard as Burns can be to him that he does have a genuine soft spot for him. When Burns had a 10-Minute Retirement after selling the power plant to some German investors, he joined Smithers for a night slumming it at Moe's. Smithers has also occasionally talked Burns out of evil acts such as when he stopped Burns from having Homer beaten for writing an angry letter.
Nerd Glasses: Used to convey his fastidious, pencil-pusher mentality.
Nerdy Nasalness: Less pronounced than other examples of this trope but he does have a fairly nasally-sounding voice. Has become less apparent in later seasons as Harry Shearer's voice has deepened due to age.
Nice Guy: Despite consistently doing the bidding of Mr. Burns, Smithers is usually nice and friendly to others.
Obsessively Organized: Supplemental material for "Who Shot Mr. Burns" states that he was once arrested for "tidying federal property" and his psychological profile describes him as "obsessive- compulsive." He also alphabetized Mr. Burns' breakfast in "Homer the Smithers." It's also telling that when Mr. Burns demotes him and assigns him to bathroom cleaning duty in "Marge Gets A Job," he actually enjoys it.
Smithers: Springtime fresh. Winter white. What could be better?
Odd Friendship: With Marge Simpson, of all people due to their shared interests and their respective relationship troubles. His relationship with Homer also varies per episode since Smithers can be more approachable than his boss.
Only Sane Employee: Smithers is pretty much the only person at the power plant who actually knows what he's doing. Several episodes show that Homer is just the worst of an extremely stupid and incompetent workforce (sometimes not even the worst).
Only Sane Man: Smithers has no emotional outbursts at all. Aside from some odd details about his love for Burns (his screensaver and the reveal that he raised Smithers after his father died), he is the most reasonable and sane person in the show.
Promotion to Opening Titles: In the second season, he and Mr. Burns are added to the background at Homer's workstation. The HD intro instead moves them to the house pan shot.
Punch-Clock Villain: Despite working for possibly the evilest man in Springfield, Smithers is perfectly affable when off the clock and has even helped the Simpson family out occasionally. He helped Lisa find the creator of the Malibu Stacy dolls in "Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy", went directly against Mr. Burns when he went too far in "Who Shot Mr. Burns?" and genuinely tried to be a Benevolent Boss when Mr. Burns was arrested before he discovered his employees mocking him in "American History X-cellent". He sometimes worries that this doesn't actually mean much, as he's still devoted his life to an evil man.
Punny Name: His full name, Waylon Smithers, sounds a lot like "Wayland the Smith" from Germanic/Norse mythology.
Race Lift: In his first appearance ("Homer's Odyssey"), Smithers was dark-skinned with blue hair due to an unfortunate mistake when the show was sent overseas to Korea to be colorized and animated. The production crew did think about leaving him this way, but the thought of a black man who sucked up to his white boss wouldn't sit well with a lot of people, so they made it known that Smithers would be white (er, yellow) for all subsequent episodes. On the DVD commentary for this episode, director Wes Archer said that he made Smithers black by expressing his interest towards including black characters in his episodes. Jokingly handwaved by some of the writers, that in "Homer's Odyssey", Smithers had just come back from holiday with a heavy tan.
Single-Issue Psychology: It was implied in one episode that Smithers' sexuality was caused by Mr. Burns telling him, when he was young, that his father died in the Amazon, killed by a tribe of savage women. It would explain his freak out in a strip club.
Single-Target Sexuality: Smithers admires Mr. Burns way too much for it to be just a sycophant to his boss. In recent seasons, he is attracted to or at least dates other men but it's clear he sees Burns as the love of his life. Even if Burns doesn't feel the same way.
Silent Snarker: Sometimes his expressions speak in place of words.
Straight Gay: He's gay, but he isn't particularly flamboyant. He does join dances and musical numbers with joy but only on a few occasions.
Subordinate Excuse: He's deeply in love with Burns and became his servant for it.
Sycophantic Servant: He's a devoted minion to Mr. Burns. In the Dracula Halloween episode, he is even dressed literally as Renfield in Francis Ford Coppola's Bram Stoker's Dracula movie
Undying Loyalty: While there are times Smithers will draw the line with Burns' cruelty, he will always end up back by his side by the end of it. Even when Burns was bankrupt and no longer his employer, he immediately moved him to his house and continued to serve his whims.
What Does She See in Him?: An LGBT example, it's not clear why he's so attracted to Burns, a weak, fragile man who is decades older than him and is terrible towards every living being on the planet including himself. The Blunder Years tried to explain this by having Mr. Burns' be a father-figure to Smithers after unwittingly causing Waylon Smithers, Sr.'s death. However, Smithers' is still infatuated with him despite this, either because of continuity or because he has an Electra complex.
Yes-Man: To Mr. Burns.
One episode parodied the concept by giving Burns a team of Yes Men, with Smithers as alpha. On discovering he's suddenly become poor, Burns denounces them all as the yes men they are. They, of course, reply, "Yes, sir!"
Subverted by the fact that Smithers will sometimes oppose Burns if he feels he needs to, such as trying to talk Burns out of blocking the sun over Springfield (as it "crossed the line from everyday villainy to cartoonish super-villainy"), or in going behind his back to reveal Sideshow Bob's electoral fraud to Bart and Lisa, fearing the consequences for his "choice of lifestyle" if the Republican Bob takes power. He is also prone to gently correcting some of Burns' less grounded ideas, such as pointing out his planned company softball team consist of now-long deceased veterans, or offering to make a logo for Burns' cult after he repeatedly replicates copyrighted ones by mistake.
You Need to Get Laid: Due to focusing too much of his time on Mr. Burns, Smithers is coldly rejected by Mr. Burns when he tries to admit his feelings for him. After singing about his woes and sexual frustration, Homer sets him up with another man.