Aesop Amnesia: In the middle of the first season, Arturo is devastated from grief and guilt over Mónica's apparent death because she was only following his plan. Once he learns Mónica is still alive, he goes right back to making half-assed escape "plans" and convincing or bullying the other hostages into helping him.
Ain't Too Proud to Beg: In the first season's twelfth episode, when Denver overpowers him in his attempted Cock Fight with the latter, Arturo begs him to not punch him in the face by saying his stress makes him do reckless mistakes. Denver only spares him when Arturo mentions that several hostages are executing his escape plan at the moment, forcing Denver to intervene with that.
Attention Whore: Especially in Seasons 3 and 4, where he desperately tries to be seen as a hero.
Blatant Lies: At the beginning of Season 3, Arturo has made his post-mint heist life talking about his "heroics" by the time the bank heist begins, even though we had already seen in the previous two seasons that he's a Dirty Coward who, while coming up with some of the plans, merely delegated them to other hostages without him participating in them whatsoever, and all of them backfired in some way.
Character Development: Of the negative type. While he's shown as a bad person from his first appearance, he still shows some significant redeeming qualities in the first few episodes, such as trying to convince the robbers to let go the most vulnerable hostages from early on, being more active in trying to find a way to escape and even changing his mind about not taking care of his child with Monica. However, as the series progresses, he becomes a bigger and bigger Glory Seeker, and his good traits eventually disappear.
Cheater Gets Cheated On: Arturo starts off the series as a married man with children who's been two-timing on his wife Laura with his secretary Mónica, and has already impregnated Mónica with another child of his by the time the heist on the Royal Mint begins. A Wrong-Name Outburst caused from his concern for Mónica's life when he gets the chance to talk to Laura via phone in Episode 5 of Season 1 leads to Laura finding out about his infidelity to her, and not only does Laura make divorce plans for the future, but Mónica eventually hooks up with Denver, the robber whom Arturo believed had killed Mónica (Denver actually faked her death in defiance of Berlin's order to kill her, and she comes back fine with the other hostages once Berlin reverts his own command), towards the end of Season 1, and turns on Arturo by becoming an accomplice to the heist team on multiple occasions. Following the interim between Seasons 2 and 3, while Arturo managed to become a public celebrity after being dropped from his job of director by cashing in on his success as an alleged "hero" among the hostages of the Mint heist, he makes it quite clear that his home life and mental conditions took a toll from the experience of losing both his wife and affair, and Mónica (now a full-time member of the heist team) can only feel repulsed by his obsessive behavior for her when they meet again inside the Bank of Spain. To add insult to injury for Arturo, Denver is the one who ended up naming Mónica's son with Arturo upon the latter's birth.
Cock Fight: In Episode 12 of Season 1, he deliberately starts a physical one against Denver in an attempt to get Mónica back. He ends up failing quickly, without landing any hit on Denver before the latter overpowers him and sends him begging Denver to not punch him in the face.
Defiant Captive: Thoroughly deconstructed. He wishes to be seen as a brave and heroic leader to the other hostages, but comes off as nothing more than a cowardly and entitled Manchild. His increasingly desperate plans to escape and resist the robbers only make things worse for everyone including himself, and both heists eventually get to the point where even the other hostages tell him to sit down and shut up.
Dirty Coward: The damned jerk makes a big plan to escape capture that he tells the heist team the moment they threaten to beat him up.
Drama Queen: Big time. When Manila kneecaps him in Season 4, he acts as if he's mortally wounded, even though the bullet didn't hit any of his essential arteries at all.
Freudian Slip: Accidentally says Monica's name while comforting his own wife in a phone call, revealing his infidelity. Berlin is utterly flabbergasted by this and can't help but laugh and crack jokes at it when the call is over.
Hate Sink: To make a long story short, among all of the cast, throughout multiple seasons, he is one of the most loathsome individuals. Cheating on his wife, being a Dirty Coward, making idiotic attempts at being a Defiant Captive that he bullies other people into helping him with (and then gets them killed or nearly so), elitist, being a Mean Boss... And in Season 4 he offers Amanda pills to help her anxiety, but later flashbacks show he molested her while she was under its effects.
Hypocrite: When Arturo catches Mónica and Denver having sex in Episode 11 of Season 1, he accuses the latter of raping his then-lover. It doesn't stop him from actually raping Amanda later in Season 4.
In-Series Nickname: Berlin coins "Arturito" (translated to "Little Artie" in English) as a derogatory term for him, which several other robbers also use whenever they refer to him. Considering Arturo tries to be as macho as possible, it's as denigrating to him as you expect it to be.
It's All About Me: Even if he claims to care about Mónica and their child, ultimately he's only trying to make everything about himself because he's an Entitled Bastard.
Jerkass Has a Point:
Can't really blame the guy for not counting on the heist team to keep their word to not harm the hostages. Helsinki concedes to Arturo's distrust.
He's right about the bomb strapped to him in Season 2 being a fake. Granted, his way of responding to this realization (wanting to strip it off and make another escape plan) would have fucked everyone over, himself included, so Alison's right in forcing him to sit down and shut up.
Even if he's playing himself up to an extreme during his talk at the TED Expy in the intro of Season 3's premiere, he has a point in saying the heist team are far from being heroes, and put him and the other hostages in the Mint through many terrible things. Most notably, he has a right to hate Denver for basically kidnapping his child.
Jerk with a Heart of Jerk: Since the beginning, every time the viewers may think he has some standards and decency deep down, he will say or do something that contradicts this in the same scene. In the first season, he makes a couple moving speechs to his wife Laura, but ruins it at the end of both times by calling her Monica, the name of his lover; Berlin gets amused by this and comments it to him after the first time.
Jizzed in My Pants: Arturo gets a little... overexcited while groping Mónica after her apparent return from the dead.
Kavorka Man: There's nothing attractive about his appearance or personality, but at the start of the show, he has two women in love with him. He ends up losing both of them.
Karmic Butt-Monkey: He gets abused far more repeatedly than the other hostages. Justified, as he's a despicable, stubborn coward who doesn't really care about the other hostages and is just using them as a means to escape.
Knee-capping: Manila shoots him in the knee in Season 4 as punishment for yet another stupid act of defiance.
Laser-Guided Karma:
After the Mint heist, his relationships with both his wife Laura and Monica completely fall apart, and he effectively loses his son with Monica, while his three other sons refuse to speak to him as he cheated on their mother.
During the Bank heist, he ends up getting shot by Monica when he tries to let her guard down to kill her, only to fall for a very obvious trap after dismissing Mario's warnings.
Leeroy Jenkins: He never really has a plan when he tries to sabotage the thieves', he just tosses crazy ideas at the wall as soon as he thinks of them in the hopes something sticks. And he purposely gets taken hostage in Season 3 to try to be a hero.
Manipulative Bastard: He constantly tries to make other hostages do what he wants by appealing to their desire to survive or the chance that they could be the heroes of the day.
Mean Boss: During his time as the Mint's director, he continuously bullies his employees around by threatening to fire them. It says a whole lot about him when Torres, a former employee of his and one of the hostages during the Mint heist, tells Nairobi (one of the robbers) in Episode 13 of Season 1 that she's the best boss he's ever worked for.
Miles Gloriosus: By the time of Season 3, he managed to build himself a pretty profitable reputation by spreading Blatant Lies about his "heroism" during the Mint heist, the premiere episode's opening scene involving him entering as a guest speaker in a Spanish TED Expy event.
The Password Is Always "Swordfish": At the beginning of the first episode, while the robbers are gathering the Mint hostages' phones and their PINs, Arturo says that his phone's PIN is 1234, which both Denver and Rio laugh at.
Denver: Phone. [Arturo gives Denver his phone] PIN?
Arturo: W-what do you need the PIN for?
Denver: [Beat] You give me the PIN, or I'll spit it out of you by kicking your ass. You'll see. PIN.
Arturo: 1234.
[both Denver and Rio laugh]
Denver: All the smartface you have, and you input that shitty PIN! What a shithead!
Rabble Rouser: When he becomes a hostage again in Season 3, all of his attempted manipulations to have the other hostages fight the heist team come across as this.
Sleeping with the Boss: At the beginning of the series, Arturo has had an affair relationship with Mónica for several years, with Tokyo narrating that Mónica had made him feel young again ever since his marriage to his wife Laura 14 years ago. By the end of the second season, he ends up losing both Laura and Mónica, the former once she discovered she had been cheating on him for a good while and thus filed a divorce from him, and the latter when she defects to the heist team after finding Denver to be a better boyfriend for her.
Small Name, Big Ego: He definitely overestimates himself and has a narcissistic ego.
Too Dumb to Live: His pathetic attempts at being a Defiant Captive usually end up biting him in the ass, such as getting shot in the first season, and getting near-fatally shot in the fifth. It's a miracle he's still alive.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Originally, he was just a cowardly, selfish jerk. In Season 4, he ends up becoming a rapist.
Uncertain Doom: Despite having a pulse in Episode 3 of Season 5, it's not made clear if Arturo ultimately survived the shootout with Mónica.
Villain with Good Publicity: In the intro of Season 3's first episode, he's shown to have become a well-known public figure and motivational speaker after the first heist, with legions of fans who believe him to be a courageous hero, and comprise the only notable group of civilians who oppose the heist team. While he makes some good points during his speech in that moment (e.g. the heist crew shouldn't be considered heroes at all), Arturo himself is far from a hero, and the following events after he deliberately gets himself inside the Bank reveal him to be even more despicable than he was in the series' beginning.
Vomit Discretion Shot: In the Season 1 episode "You Asked for It", Arturo vomits at the sight of Mónica having sex with Denver, but the resulting puke isn't shown from the angles of the ensuing shots.
Wrong-Name Outburst: Accidentally says Monica's name while declaring his love for his wife in a phone call, exposing his infidelity to basically everybody.