Affably Evil: Acts really kind and generous. However, he's willing to put many lives in danger to get what he wants.
Badass Bookworm: He's a highly-learned individual and polyglot, and in Season 2 he gets in a wins a fight against Raquel's ex, a police officer, in about two moves and without getting touched.
Batman Gambit: He's very good at predicting the police's plans and using it to his advantage.
Big Little Brother: He's taller than Berlin, who's slightly older than him.
Character Tics: He adjusts his glasses by pushing them back to his nose when he's explaining something or pandering his thoughts.
The Chessmaster: He has plans within plans, can come up with workable ideas on the fly and prepares for (almost) any eventuality.
Clueless Chick-Magnet: Besides his love interest Raquel, both Tokyo and Nairobi have tried to flirt with him, despite his awkwardness with women.
Crazy-Prepared: His plan takes into account almost every possibility that may happen - in fact, potential failures and mistakes are also part of the plan.
Connected All Along: Andrés and him are brothers, as revealed in the finale of Season 2.
Dating Catwoman: Somewhat. He knows perfectly well that Raquel is the cop tasked with bringing the bank robbers down, but he falls in love with her anyway.
Did Not See That Coming: While he planned the first heist down to the smallest detail, he did not expect to develop feelings for the negotiator, Raquel. He also didn't expect a vengeful Sierra tracking him and his men down, only getting saved because of Sierra going into labor.
A Father to His Men: To the entire heist team, but specially to Tokyo, who calls him his "guardian angel".
Heroic BSoD: A couple of them.
One in the Season 3 finale, when he believes Suárez has executed Raquel. Not only does it make him to have a breakdown, but also makes him to think below his usual potential until Tokyo suggests, with a sound argument, that she may not be dead after all, which gives him back his focus.
In Season 4, Nairobi's death actually has the opposite effect. He was having problems concentrating to elaborate the next plan, but after receiving the news, he is filled with a Tranquil Fury that sharpens his wits once again.
In Season 5, when Tokyo sacrifices herself to take out Gandía and several other soldiers, he gets another serious breakdown. Sierra takes this as an opportunity to escape, after which the Professor manages to snap out of it.
It's All About Me:
In a rare moment of self-admission, during Season 5, when Sierra probes about his real reason for the second heist and says he did it for the thrill, the Professor realises she is absolutely right.
By the Grand Finale, he openly admits he's playing up the Robin Hood shtick just to fool their fans, and he is a thief through and through.
Manipulative Bastard: Not only does he makes plans within plans, he is also quite capable of making things on the fly.
In the Season 2 premiere, when he goes to the police's discovery of the heist team's plotting refuge for the Mint heist, and sees Alberto taking one of the few legitimate pieces of evidence in it back to Madrid, the Professor manages to get himself in Alberto's car and, after driving the latter mad by bringing up his past abuse of Raquel and attempted affairs in the second episode, effortlessly knocks him out, giving him time to change the proof with something meaningless.
Then, as Alberto naturally arrests him for aggresion towards authority, he calls Raquel in the third episode and exploits an optional bathroom break to give himself several bruises, so he can play a Wounded Gazelle Gambit and make it look like he just defended himself from Alberto engaging in Police Brutality.
When it is revealed that Ángel is about to return from his coma, the Professor knows it's a trap, but cannot be sure of that - so he gets dressed as a clown and publishes a fake advert to flood the hospital with clowns while he sneaks around and gives a toy with a camera to one of the children in the hospital, sending him to scout.
His plan for when things start to go down the drain is to free some hostages and invite a journalist and camera in — so the heist team can use it to turn public opinion in their favor, invoking Underdogs Never Lose.
Minored in Ass-Kicking: He's such a great planner and manipulator that it's surprising to see how easily he can subdue someone in a fight. Just look at how he casually subdues Alberto and Raquel.
Mysterious Past: At the beginning, no one knows anything about him. His name, his age, where he comes from — it's all a mystery. This is progressively subverted over the course of the series, as his identity and backstory are slowly revealed.
Nice Guy: He might be planning a great robbery, but he insists on making sure no one gets injured, and when he personally meets Raquel, he's sincere in their interactions.
Sherlock Scan: As Tokyo puts it, he can’t be Superman using X-Ray Vision, so he settles on being Sherlock Holmes, and he lives up to it. Just as Lisbon was though to have died, he searches for context clues in the Bank of Spain to prove that she's alive and sees multiple evidences, namely Angel not being mournful, the van that was chasing them having mud on its wheels, and lastly seeing Sierra, the negotiator collaborating with Angel.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The nerdy Sensitive Guy to Berlin's arrogant Manly Man.
Shout-Out: The false name he uses during the Mint heist towards Raquel is Salvador Martí, just like the man in charge of The Ministry of Time (another Netflix-broadcast Spanish TV show).
Smarter Than You Look: He appears to be an nerdy meek guy that would not hurt a fly. Behind those glasses is a brain that developed an incredibly complicated plan to carry out a heist that would steal more than two thousand million Euros and later gold worth 5 billion Euros and get away with it, and he is fit enough to knock out a trained cop with a Pressure Point without suffering an injury.
Smart People Wear Glasses: If it wasn't obvious already.
Strong Family Resemblance: From the little visual material we see of his father, it's already made clear that the Professor takes much of his appearance.
Tampering with Food and Drink: In the Season 1 finale, he attempts to kill Raquel's mother by pouring dioxin into a coffee she was going to drink, when he came to visit her after finding out she had heard an archived phone call of Ángel exposing his identity as the Mint heist's mastermind. He ultimately doesn't go with it, throwing the cup from the mother's hands before she can begin drinking it, and is relieved when he sees that she thought she had accidentally dropped it herself (due to her prominent memory problems).
Tranquil Fury: Whenever he gets really angry, it almost always manifests as this. The stand-out moments would be when he faces Alberto, Raquel's abusive ex-husband, in Season 1, and his reaction when he learns about Nairobi's death in Season 4.
Villain Protagonist: He's the overall main protagonist of the show and the leader of a heist.
Xanatos Speed Chess: His speciality. His solution to every misstep or failed plan is to improvise with another plan. When that fails, he improvises with another plan. And the cycle goes on until he gets what he wants.