Action Mom: Although the "mom" part is quite complicated, she embodies the "action" part very well.
Battle Cry: After her death at the hands of Gandia, the Robbers yell the Bank heist is for her.
Gang: FOR NAIROBI!
Benevolent Boss: Torres, an elderly Mint employee that she enlists to mass-produce the money the robbers are going to take (with the hostages also having a choice to get some themselves), says she's the best boss he's ever had in Episode 13 of Season 1, as his reasoning for picking the "money" option when given the choice of choosing liberty or money.
Brutal Honesty: She has no problem speaking her mind.
Character Death: Killed by Gandia towards the end of Season 4.
Freudian Excuse: She got into the plan because she wants to get her kid back.
The Heart: Pretty much the crew's cheerful spirit, even during hard times and is loved by (almost) everyone
Incompatible Orientation: Develops feelings for Helsinki, who is gay.
Informed Flaw: Tokyo's narration introducing each of the robbers in the first episode describes Nairobi as "crazy", but for all her hamminess and cheerfulness, she's actually Closer to Earth than most people around her, including Tokyo herself.
Lovely Angels: With Tokyo in Season 3's first few episodes, combined with Back-to-Back Badasses.
Ms. Fanservice: Not as much as Tokyo, but she also has had several scenes where she only wears underwear or a bikini.
Missing Mom: To her unseen son Axel.
My Greatest Failure: She regards abandoning her son Axel to be this, and wants to rectify this by being a good mom to her future kids. Too bad she got killed by Gandia before she got the chance to.
Nice Girl: She's usually kind, friendly, and caring to everyone, and only gets angry if she has a good reason to be upset.
Only Sane Woman:
Has shades of this, especially after Berlin starts going off the rails.
Seems the most reasonable person every time she argues with each character. Especially when compared to Tokyo.
Platonic Life-Partners: Becomes very close to Helsinki in Seasons 3 and 4. While Episode 7 of Season 1 previously revealed that Nairobi has romantic feelings for him, Helsinki admits he only loves her like a sister. And he's by far the most devastated when Nairobi is gunned down by Gandia.
Sacrificial Lion: Gandia makes a show of killing her right in front of the heist members to emphasize just how much of a dangerous and insane monster he truly is.
Statuesque Stunner: She's 5'9"note  and visibly towers over other girls like Tokyo and Allison.
Stepford Smiler: Zig-zagged. She's fun and bubbly much of the time, but can be more somber when she talks about how she lost custody of her child and really wanted to be a mother, as Tokyo's curiosity in a flashback from the first season's fifth episode prompts her to. The "Stepford" part seems to fade away chronologically, though, as her positive mood appears to be pretty genuine, and doesn't get in the way of anything serious that pops up in her mind.
The Tease: Not the extent of Tokyo, but she can be a bit of a flirter at times.
You Monster!: She calls Berlin a pig, among other things, as she hears the large plethora of his past crimes (including plenty of false ones, much to Berlin's anger) mentioned on the news about him in Episode 8 of Season 1.