Broken Bird: She has a troubled personal life. Her mother suffers from dementia and her ex-husband was abusive.
Character Tics: Ties her hair with a writing instrument whenever she's about to get down to business.
Chessmaster Sidekick: In the second heist, she's this assisting the Professor (who's the resident Chessmaster and leader of the group) in strategies, plots and schemes while the other member are almost entirely in the frontline.
Damsel in Distress: During the second heist, after being caught by the authorities in season 4.
Dating Catwoman: She didn't know that the nerdy Nice Guy who loaned her his phone is the mastermind who assembled the Caper Crew behind the robbery she is working at.
The Dog Bites Back: After being almost constantly belittled by most of her partners and superiors, blamed for things that are the fault of others (such as the failed attempt to get several hostages out, with Prieto ordering her to pick Allison Parker instead of the eight she would have picked), accused of being The Mole and threatened with the loss of her child if she does not cooperate, Raquel delays revealing what she has found long enough to allow the heist team to escape, and when she leaves the police corps she heavily criticizes the National Intelligence Center for the way they interfered in her work. Then she joins the Professor to further disgrace the system she used to work for.
Domestic Abuse: Raquel suffered physical abuse at the hands of her now ex-husband Alberto. Unfortunately, few people believed her when she reported it, due to Alberto's positive reputation among the national police force.
Dope Slap: In the Season 3 premiere, Raquel gives one to Tokyo on their first encounter since the Mint heist, in response to Tokyo's initial anger towards her and disbelief that she would become one of the heist team's members without betraying them at a later point.
Driven to Suicide: In the Season 1 finale, Raquel attempts to get herself killed by the robbers after she learns that Ángel was not a mole for them like she suspected, and reads through all the exasperated calls he did to her just before his car crash in her voicemail. She walks into a close area to the Mint where she could easily be shot; just as Helsinki aims a sniper rifle at her, Suárez and Prieto run to save Raquel by bringing her back to the tent, with the latter telling her that she deserves to take a break.
Fair Cop: She's attractive-looking and a pretty good police leader.
Groin Attack: In the Season 2 finale, in her brief fight against the Professor's Serbian auxiliary team, Raquel does this to a member who manages to grab her and take her pistol in order to free herself from him. She's quickly defeated just after that, when she's held at a gunpoint by the other members that she can't escape from this time around.
Heel–Face Turn: At the end of Season 2, she chooses to hold back revealing where the heist team is meeting long enough to help them escape. In Season 3, she becomes a full-fledged heist team member under the codename Lisbon. Might count as a Face–Heel Turn in how the robbers are viewed.
Hero Antagonist: In the first two seasons, she's the antagonist cop to the main criminal characters. Even if the audience is supposed to root for the criminals, she gets a lot of Sympathetic P.O.V..
Hourglass Plot: She goes from confronting the robbers in the first heist to becoming one of the robbers by the second one, complete with the defining red jumpsuit and Dali mask. Both Sierra and the Professor lampshade this.
Man Bites Man: In the Season 2 finale, after she's caught trying to personally arrest the Professor and put on restraining suspension by the Serbian auxiliary team, Raquel tries to bait the Professor into telling her that she needs medication to help her with a fake stomach pain, and bites his hand just as he offers him a pill and a glass of water. Given the circumstances she's in, it proves to be rather useless.
Multigenerational Household: During the first two seasons, she resides in a shared household with her daughter Paula and her mother Mariví. When they move to vacational places with the robbers afterwards, Raquel gets her own residential place apart from Mariví and Paula, although it's still close to theirs.
The Scapegoat: She ends up being blamed for the heist team's escape, as well as several other problems that were actually caused by Prieto or others.
Shared Family Quirks: Discussed by her mother in Episode 7 of Season 2, when she gives her a set of markers owned by Paula to use on her map for her personal manhunt on the Professor and remarks that Paula chews on the marker's caps, much like how Raquel used to do.
Sympathetic Inspector Antagonist: Her role in the first two seasons, as the inspector who leads the case against the Villain Protagonist robbers during that time.
Taken Off the Case: In Episode 7 of Season 2, she's taken off her position of lead inspector in the Mint heist's investigation once the police identify the Professor and discover the relationship Raquel had with him. In reaction, Raquel tells them that they can go on without her as she angrily lends her badge and the pistol she had in hand by then to them, determined to go on a manhunt for the Professor on her own.
Was It All a Lie?: Played for Drama in the middle of Season 2, when she realizes that "Salva" is actually the Professor and takes him to the farm to interrogate him, broken down because she thinks he only got close to her to use her. The Professor tells her that he did initially, but actually fell in love with her as he got to know her.