Affectionate Nickname: As first given by Tokyo through narration in Season 1's tenth episode, his mother called him "Rayo" ("Lightning" in Spanish) as a child because she thought he'd want to become an athlete, until he proved otherwise be spending much of his time playing video games. Near the end of the episode, when he watches a video tape of his parents sneaked into him by Raquel, his mother is seen using "Rayo" repeatedly towards him.
Bash Brothers: With Denver.
Break the Cutie: Goes through a very traumatic experience after being brutally tortured by Alicia Sierra.
Didn't Think This Through: Rio's capture in the Season 3 premiere happened because he used a connection between a pair of satellite-based phones to communicate with Tokyo during her stay in Panama's mainland. He didn't consider how such a means of phone communication (and likely every other one possible) could be easily detected by the Interpol's network, even if he and Tokyo had bought the phones from a black market.
Distressed Dude: Him being captured by the authorities and his friends wanting to rescue him kicks off the plot in season 3.
The Load:
Rio is initially seen as a downplayed case of this by the Professor, because he's young, immature, and has less experience than the others, with only his hacking expertise coming in handy. He eventually proves himself to be more competent overall as the Mint heist progresses.
He becomes a straighter example between Seasons 3 and 4, because his trauma from the torture he got at the beginning of the former season makes him ineffectual once he comes to the Bank of Spain.
Nice Guy: He's the one who has the most empathy with the hostages. Deconstructed because this ends up leading to the police learning Tokyo and him are in the heist.
Playful Hacker: He learned how to program at age 6, and was hired by a security company, but then he was asked to hack a system belonging to a mansion in Geneva, and he's been on the Interpol list ever since.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The naive and innocent Sensitive Guy to Denver's brash Manly Man.
Strong Girl, Smart Guy: His love interest Tokyo is a tough Strong Girl, while Rio is considered the weakest member of the team but is a Teen Genius hacker.
Teen Genius: The youngest member of the team and an expert hacker.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: The second heist is only possible due to his capture.