AcCENT upon the Wrong SylLABle: Only occasionally, but when he does... could he BE more of an example?
Agony of the Feet: Monica accidentally cut the tip of his toe off in "The One with All the Thanksgivings".
Allegedly Dateless: He is constantly knocked by himself and others for being terrible with women. While he does have commitment issues that prevent his relationships lasting long, he has no trouble getting women. Later in the show, once he's in a stable relationship with Monica, the show claims he's always been terrible with women, unable to even talk to them, despite the early seasons showing he successfully uses humor to smooth-talk and charm women without any problem at all and the later seasons having him and Monica being the only two in a functional (rather than dysfunctional) relationship.
Amazingly Embarrassing Parents: It's hard to beat telling people how you got your son his first condoms on The Tonight Show. "And then he burst into flames."
Chandler: All kids are embarrassed by their parents. You'd have to come up with a whole new word for what I went through.
Ambiguously Bi: Loved women and Monica, but had some Even the Guys Want Him moments, was teased the most for acting gay, was deeply protesting constantly and has made out with both Ross and a crossdressing man while drunk. Plus, in "The One with the Superbowl", after Phoebe sings her No Bisexuals song, he notices a kid smiling at him knowingly and ends the scene sulking. Chandler was originally meant to be gay, but the writers dropped the idea when Matthew Perry was cast. He's also a huge fan of romantic comedies, knowledge of celebrities (which makes Rachel suggest he watches less E! and more ESPN) and once started a sentence with "If I was a guy..."
Chandler: What is it about me? Is it my hair?
Rachel: Yes, Chandler, that's exactly what it is. It's your hair.
Phoebe: Yeah, you have homosexual hair.
I Am Not Left-Handed: As revealed during his table tennis match with Mike, he's fairly good at competitive games, more than enough to keep up with Monica. He just preferred to downplay it because of her ultra-competitive nature.
I Am Not My Father: Many of his neuroses stem from worrying he'll end up like his flighty and self-absorbed parents, and mimic their unpleasant marriage. Much of his Character Development, especially his relationship with Monica, revolves around getting over these issues.
Benevolent Boss: Several episodes establish that those working under him at his job generally view him this way, possibly because he doesn't really care about his work and can't be bothered to pressure them. He even lets his staff go home after they were contracted to work on Christmas which would likely have gotten him in trouble had he not decided to quit shortly afterwards.
Beta Couple: With Monica.
Betty and Veronica: The Betty to Richard's Veronica for Monica's Archie.
Beware the Silly Ones: For the most part, his jokes might hurt feelings sometimes, but they're not meant with malice. However…:
In “The One Where Ross Finds Out”, where Monica has been driving him crazy with all the training, he makes her stop by 'innocently' pointing out every shitty thing that had happened to her recently and how depressed she must feel. He even warns her beforehand to not make him do anything he'll regret.
In "The One with Rachel's Other Sister", Chandler is genuinely hurt that Ross wouldn't consider him a good parent to Emma if he and Rachel died without Monica around due to the perception that he makes jokes all the time and wouldn't put his foot down. When Rachel and her sister Amy get into a cat fight and break one of Monica's fancy plates, Chandler proves Ross wrong and calls them both out for acting childish, and makes them apologize to Monica and each other.
In "The One with the Thumb", when the group start ragging on him for his smoking, Chandler successfully manages to turn them all against each other when he points out all their annoying flaws, prompting them to forget all about his cigarettes as they argue amongst themselves.
Bound and Gagged: In "The One with the 'Cuffs", Rachel's boss leaves him handcuffed to a drawer in her room.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: Despite being the joker of the gang and rather lazy, he's shown to be very capable at his job, being promoted several times (including heading up an office in Tulsa). When he switches to advertising, he's good enough to skip several rungs on the career ladder. Even in his youth, he was voted "Class Clown" in high school but still managed to get into Columbia Univeristy.
Butt-Monkey: A very close second, after Ross. While Ross is very unlucky in every situation and his humiliations tend to be more physical, Chandler's Butt-Monkey status mainly consists of his friends belittling him and making passive-aggressive comments about him (both to his face and behind his back) and generally being considered a loser for no apparent reason. Chandler's own Self-Deprecation also helps.
The Cameo: Appears in Caroline in the City.
Cannot Keep a Secret: Chandler is pretty much made of this trope; several times during the series, he has accidentally revealed his friends' secrets. Probably his biggest offense is when he revealed to Rachel that Ross was in love with her. In a final season episode, he reveals to a child that they were adopted and then later reveals to Phoebe's nieces and nephew that Phoebe actually gave birth to them (though to be fair, he didn't know that these were secrets).
I Can't Dance: He openly admits he's a terrible dancer and refuses to dance at weddings to avoid embarrassing himself. Before his wedding to Monica he takes dance lessons so he can surprise her for their first dance, but then his shoes turn out to be too slippery to do anything but his old "waving my hands around" move.
Character Development:
At the beginning, Chandler had serious issues with commitment, which made him incapable of holding a relationship. He eventually overcame them thanks to his relationship with Monica and was also ready to start a family with her.
Over the course of ten years with the gang, he went from hating Thanksgiving, since it was the day his parents broke up, to volunteering to help Monica make the dinner and getting mad at the others for "ruining Cranberry Day!" His attitude noticeably switches after he and Monica are officially together, indicating that she's the reason his opinion on the holiday improved.
Concerning Thanksgiving; Chandler hated the holiday so much that he refused to eat any of the traditional foods. But in Season 8, after he and Monica get married, she started making him a small rotisserie chicken to eat, indicating he's starting to grow on the matter.
Characterization Marches On: In the first few seasons, Chandler is shown to be as rabid a sports fan as Joey is. As the Ambiguously Bi traits increase in later seasons, this goes away to the point where even Rachel chides him for not knowing who Paul O'Neill is.note  This was slightly explained away in season four's "The One Where Chandler's In A Box", where he pretends to want to watch the game, but Phoebe tells him he doesn't have to act macho because the other guys weren't there, and he happily watches the parade instead. Oh, he also can't think of a masculine sport on the spot:
Chandler: This is like figure skating team all over again! ... I mean synchronized swimming! ... I mean... I mean the balance beam. Help me.
Ross: FOOTBALL!
Chandler: Thank you!
Cloudcuckoolander's Minder: Chandler is this to the child-like Joey. When they are getting ready for the flight to London:
Chandler: You got your passport?
Joey: Yeah, in my third drawer on my dresser. You don't want to lose that.
[Chandler glares at him. At first Joey doesn't know why, it takes him a little bit to figure it out]
Joey: Ohh!! [runs to his room]
Commitment Issues: One of his defining traits. The first four seasons have him freaking out whenever it gets serious with a girl and it's only thanks to Monica's support he copes with their relationship. This is attributed to his unstable upbringing, his parents' horrible divorce and being continually screwed over by the women he does commit to (and given that, until Monica, every girl he dated during the series cheated on him, and that his parents can't stand to be in the same room together, it’s hard to judge his fears).
Chandler: So, I guess this is it.
Monica: What's it?
Chandler: Well, it's over. The thing we had.
Monica: Why, exactly?
Chandler: Because, we had a fight. I mean...
Monica: Chandler, you don't just give up after you have a fight. I mean, if you do that you'd never have a relationship lasting longer than... Ohhhhh.
Crappy Holidays: He views every Thanksgiving this way as he associates it with the year his parents decided to tell him they were divorcing in the middle of dinner. He refuses to be part of the celebrations and can't eat any of the traditional foods (as his mouth was full when his parents broke the news). Joey eventually declares it a tradition to hear Chandler's story every year.
Crazy Jealous Guy: While dating Kathy, he doesn't like her kissing her co-star and suspect that she is cheating on him. After being in a relationship with Monica, he doesn't like it whenever Richard is brought up.
The Cynic: This mostly stems from both his parents' divorce and his all around crappy childhood. He gradually gets better later in the series, largely thanks to Monica's love and support.
Deadpan Snarker: Of legendary proportions; it seems like Chandler can't go a scene other than the series finale without snarking some way - even in situations in which he really shouldn't. It's even exploited in "The One with All the Resolutions", in which he truly takes pains to not snark as part of his New Year's resolution (and gives up in less than a week).
Deconfirmed Bachelor: Starts out with serious commitment issues but finds he is 'happier than he ever thought he could be' after falling in love with Monica.
Digging Yourself Deeper: A specialty of Chandler's, especially around Monica's parents.
Chandler: I tend to keep talking until somebody stops me.
Dysfunctional Family: Part of why he's so quirky is being raised by two Amazingly Embarrassing Parents, a mom who Really Gets Around and writes trashy sex novels, and a dad who became a Drag Queen and ran away with the pool boy (on Thanksgiving to make him hate said holiday...).
Embarrassing First Name: Chandler's first name is considered embarrassing, though not so embarrassing that he doesn't use it - which makes sense, because his last name is...
Embarrassing Last Name: Bing, and his middle name is...
Embarrassing Middle Name: Muriel.
Ross: Chandler Muriel Bing... Boy, your parents never even gave you a chance, did they?
Flanderization:
His effeminacy. In the first season, he liked sports, beer, pizza and Baywatch as much as the other guys but had to fight against the popular misconception that he was gay. By the end, he has two copies of the Annie soundtrack, can identify Miss Congeniality through a wall, pretends to watch NFL football while openly admitting he doesn't like it, gets pedicures and has had it revealed that he (accidentally) made out with a guy in college.
His jokes. He started out as a Deadpan Snarker, but his humor gradually became less deadpan sarcasm and a lot more goofy and immature after a certain point (possibly when he got married). Specifically, his penchant for making jokes when he's uncomfortable gets downgraded to fart noises when he's saying goodbye to Rachel in the penultimate episode.
The Friends Who Never Hang: While the six were inseparable and had love and affection for each other, the two pairs of friends who arguably got along the least were Chandler/Phoebe and Chandler/Rachel, who both seemed to have a lot more interaction with him (Rachel even had sex dreams about him and Joey together) before he started dating Monica.
Gag Penis: For maybe two hours, between Rachel telling this to the other girls (long story) and Joey ratting him out.
Happily Married: To Monica in the last three seasons. The universe puts them through a lot early on: a long-distance relationship, unemployment, and infertility, but they remain incredibly happy and adore each other. They're especially impressive given their significant emotional baggage that stacks the odds against them. Namely, Chandler's parent's terrible marriage and home life which caused his Commitment Issues, Monica's insecurity from Parental Neglect and their highly neurotic natures.
Has a Type: Enjoys the controlling, domineering type of woman, like he kept ending up with Janice until she annoyed him too much, Joanna had those handcuffs and Julia Roberts's character kinkily manipulated him into a Humiliation Conga, plus he had a sweet speech to Monica about it's fine that she was high-maintenance because he liked '... maintaining' her.
Hates Being Alone: In season 2, when Joey moves out, he's openly distressed and quickly finds a new roommate despite admitting he can afford his apartment by himself. He also worries that all the other friends will get married and leave him behind, begging to be allowed to come over for holidays when this happens. Given his unstable parents and childhood, the group is probably the first security he'd ever known.
Hates Their Awesome Skill: Chandler is an excellent ping-pong player, but he tries to keep it a secret since he knows that Monica would make him join her in couples competitions if she knew.
Have I Mentioned I Am Heterosexual Today?: Oh, so many times. Lampshaded when he does this when he and Monica go to the drag club his father performs at. One of the workers tells him, "We get it. You're straight."
Henpecked Husband: Played with. While Monica often gets her way, it's mostly because they're small issues that Chandler doesn't care about. When it comes to their big decisions (moving in together, the price of the wedding, having a baby etc.), he and Monica have a very balanced dynamic, and there are several occasions when he puts his foot down.
Heroic Self-Deprecation: So much. Suffers security issues and always believes himself to be inferior to his wife Monica and is no match for her previous love interest, Richard, even after they've been together for years and are Happily Married. Also, when he and Monica are looking for good qualities in a potential sperm donor:
Monica: It's just that when we were asking him all those questions before I just realized I don't care if he's the most perfect guy in the world. He's not you.
Chandler: Yeah. He's better!
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Joey. Also with Ross during their college years.
Hidden Depths: He plays a mean game of ping pong much to Monica's surprise (Note: he was well-aware of this skill, he just didn't tell Monica because he didn't want to do couples tournaments and the like). It's not just ping pong, judging by the kinds of games Joey and Chandler play in their apartment Chandler actually is fairly athletic, just not competitive (which is Truth in Television, as Matthew Perry was a very skilled tennis player in real life).
Hilariously Abusive Childhood: His parents were never intentionally abusive per se, but his past does come close. When Monica finds out that he's Unable to Cry, she tries to make him cry by showing him an album of pictures of his childhood. Plus, in a (usually cut out) line from "The One with the Pediatrician", he was apparently molested by his piano teacher.
Horror Doesn't Settle for Simple Tuesday: The show itself made a yearly tradition out of the group's Thanksgiving plans going hilariously wrong, but Chandler's dislike of the holiday extends back much further to the point he actively boycotts the holiday and all the traditional foods. In separate flashbacks, he had part of his toe cut off by a falling knife and had his parents choose that day to announce they were divorcing because his father was having an affair with the poolboy, so it's hard to blame him. As he put it: "It's very difficult to appreciate a Thanksgiving dinner once you've seen it in reverse."
Hypocrisy Nod: He can occasionally make some mean jokes towards his friends but gets upset if one of them does so to him. He brings this up in "The One Where Monica Sings" when Ross makes a remark about him and Chandler tries to remind him that "he can only dish it out."
Hypocrite: He is extremely upset to discover that Kathy is cheating on him, despite the fact it's how he got together with Kathy. While he tells off his friends for hanging around him while he's depressed instead of enjoying themselves, he states that Kathy didn't cheat on any of them. Then he realises he has to exclude Joey, acknowledging that Kathy cheated on Joey with him by giving Joey a big hug.
Informed Deformity: It's revealed in a flashback that Monica accidentally dropped a knife on his toe and he had to amputate the top of it. We would have no way of knowing prior to this episode.
Insecure Love Interest: Concerning Monica. He felt inferior to her ex-boyfriend Richard (his previous idol) and got very worried when Phoebe introduced Monica's 'soulmate', and offered to stand aside for him. Thanks to Monica's reassurances he does get better. Also with previous girlfriends like Janice and Kathy, as much of his Self-Deprecation references his struggles to please women, which he frequently feels dejected about (not that he'd show it...).
In-Series Nickname:
Subverted. Joey comes up with a few nicknames but no one uses them.
Joey: It's like the end of an era! No more J-Man and Channy!
Chandler: Okay, I gotta ask, who calls us that?!
Chandler refers to himself as the Chan Chan Man but it doesn't catch on. He was called Skid Marks in the past.
Janice, much to his chagrin, calls him "Bing-a-ling".
Ross occasionally calls him "Chan" but this doesn't seem to stick as a nickname.
In the Blood: Gets severe cold feet right before his wedding because he and Monica were about to become "the Bings", and Bings never had happy marriages.
In Touch with His Feminine Side: Especially in later seasons, where he's sensitive, peaceful, obsessed with Broadway plays, and often mistaken for gay. He's also best friends with the manly Joey, and falls in love with the strong-willed Monica. Both relationships emphasize his feminine side but given how he takes care of Joey and calms Monica's stressing, they're pretty thankful for it.
Irony: Despite hating Thanksgiving, many fortunate events happen to Chandler on this day during the series such as Monica's parents accepting him dating their daughter and receiving a phone call that a single mother had accepted he and Monica to be the foster parents for her baby.
The Kirk: Of the men. He's The Kirk to Joey's The McCoy and Ross' The Spock.
Like Father, Like Son: Snarkily name-dropped when Rachel squees that he has great taste in men.
Lonely Rich Kid: The houseboys seemed more dependable than his parents when he was growing up.
Lousy Lovers Are Losers: Early on, Chandler was portrayed as being bad in bed, something he was very aware of, but eventually (and with Monica's help) he got much better, to the point Monica thinks he's the best she's ever had.
In "The One with Five Steaks and an Eggplant", a woman leaves a message on his machine looking for her old lover Bob, Chandler pretends to be Bob and makes a date with her. He then "consoles" her when "Bob" doesn't show up, and they sleep together. But the next morning she calls "Bob" again, to confess that she slept with another man but deeply regrets it, saying Chandler was disastrously bad in bed and that she had to stop herself from calling "Bob's" name.
In "The One with Phoebe's Uterus", Chandler is apprehensive about sleeping with his current Love Interest Kathy, because she used to date Joe (who is a Sex God) and Chandler fears the inevitable comparison since he knows he's no good. So he seeks Monica and Rachel's advice on how to become a better lover, leading to them showing Chandler a diagram of the seven female erogenous zones (unseen by the audience). By the end of the episode, a sated Kathy personally thanks Monica and Rachel, showing that the lesson did indeed help and from this episode on, the joke that Chandler is bad in bed is no longer used.
Manchild: Mostly in early seasons, where he often joins in Joey's immature boyish antics. He gets better, though he still has his moments from time to time.
Monica: Come on. Why don't you put on the tux and I'll fix you up a nice Martini.
Chandler: You know I don't really like Martinis.
Monica: Oh. Well, how about a Yoo Hoo with a funny straw?
Chandler: Ooh, yum!
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: Feminine Boy to Monica's Masculine Girl. Chandler wasn't that feminine in early seasons (he and Joey shared the same manly interests) but the show starts making girly jokes about him (wimpy, unathletic, enjoying romantic comedies, etc.) after he's paired with the strong-willed, domineering Monica. In one episode, Monica bought a different set of wedding china than the ones Chandler picked out because, in her words, the ones Chandler picked out were "too feminine."
Minor Flaw, Major Breakup: All of the friends fell into this, but Chandler was probably the most notable early on due to his simultaneous desire to be with someone and his commitment issues. Big nostrils, having a big head, not hating Yanni—all was fair game and a reason why he was regularly single for the first couple seasons. He did start to get better at it before ending up with Monica. Of course, he actually thought that relationship was over early into Season 5 when they had a fight during a getaway. Monica tells him adult relationships don't end so arbitrarily and that they can work through one fight.
Mistaken for Gay: His co-workers thinks that he is homosexual and one of them even tries to set him up with a male friend. He and Joey are also mistaken as a gay couple on more than one occasion. Hilariously, he's never mistaken for being gay by actual gay people, with the aforementioned friend claiming that their Gaydar pegs him as straight instantly.
Nice Guy: In early seasons he's cynical, has Commitment Issues and can be pretty selfish with a vengeful streak, but is a lot sweeter than he realizes. As the series progresses he takes a level in kindness, though is still very much a Deadpan Snarker.
No Social Skills: More so by the end due to flanderization. Monica lampshades this in the finale by asking if there's any social situation he's comfortable with.
Obliquely Obfuscated Occupation: Well, he has an office job, but one has to wonder about what type of job:
Monica is able to say what Chandler's job is (statistical analysis and data reconfiguration)... after he has left it. Chandler lampshades it, of course.
Chandler: I quit and you learn what I do?
This trope was also how he and Joey won Rachel and Monica's apartment. Ross asked the question, and...
Rachel: Oh, gosh. It has something to do with numbers...
Monica: ...And processing...
Rachel: He carries a briefcase...
Ross: Ten seconds. You need this, or you lose the game.
Monica: It's, um, it has something to do with transponding.
Rachel: Oh! Oh! He’s a transpons... transponster!
Monica: That's not even a word!! I can get this, I can get this!
[their time runs out]
Off the Wagon: He used to be a smoker but quit. He has several relapses over the course of the series.
One-Hour Work Week: Less justified than most of the others, as... whatever it is he does looks like a 9-5 office job. Lampshaded in one scene at Central Perk. Chandler's complaining about not being treated well at his job and Joey notes, "Well, maybe it's because you're hanging out here at 11:30 on a Wednesday..."
Out-of-Character Moment: "The One with Ross' Teeth" has him being the manly policing one, and complaining to Joey from episode start that Janine is turning Joe into a woman. Given the amount of times before and after the episode that Chandler's treated like a Virtual Girl by everyone else, it's very hypocritical of him.
Overshadowed by Awesome: Monica's previous boyfriends, especially Richard. Given that he'd idolized Richard, and her other ex-boyfriends included millionaire Pete, The Ace Allan and Fun Bobby, his insecurity is understandable. Thanks to his strong relationship with Monica, he overcomes many of his confidence issues, except for being a Sad Clown: "Being funny is all I have!"
Parental Neglect: His mother was a famous erotic novelist, his father ran off with the houseboy and he was sent to boarding school. This conversation sums it up nicely:
Chandler: Oh, that’s Parent’s Day, first grade. That’s me with the janitor, Martin.
Monica: Where were your parents?
Chandler: Oh, they didn't want to come.
Parental Substitute: In a joking manner, Chandler sometimes treats Joey as if he were his son due to Joey's lack of maturity, even stating that if he can't have Emma in the event of Ross and Rachel's death, then they can't have Joey.
Pungeon Master: He can craft witty puns and clever wordplay on the spot from time to time.
Chandler: You got a man who's a nanny? You got a "manny"?
Runaway Fiancé: Has a Freak Out before the wedding to Monica and runs off. Played sympathetically because of his Commitment Issues and he of course came back, but he's not quite let off as Phoebe throws out some What the Hell, Hero? comments, Ross really does try to kick his ass when he thinks Chandler's leaving again, and even Monica finds out (from Joey, who chose to voice his disapproval at the altar) and snarks at him a few times.
Sad Clown: Chandler is a rare example from a comedy series. This was lampshaded quite early on, when Phoebe's psychiatrist boyfriend, as part of his schtick of alienating everyone by pointing out uncomfortable truths, said, "I wouldn't want to be there when the laughter stops." Chandler himself says later that he's using humor as a defense mechanism. He's scarred from his thoughtless parents and neglected upbringing when it was implied he was used as a pawn in their divorce. He has serious self-esteem issues because of it and it's only through his relationship with the other friends (particularly his girlfriend Monica), that he gains confidence.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Monica is Hot-Blooded and energetic, while Chandler is a Deadpan Snarker.
Second Love: Third to Monica, after Richard and Pete. Richard's status as Monica's First Love is a recurring fear of his, though but Monica makes it very clear she loves him more than Richard.
Secret Relationship: With Monica for almost an entire season. Justifications included that at the start, neither of them dreamed that their London dalliance could become anything more than that. Plus, after seeing all of the drama induced by Ross and Rachel's relationship, Monica and Chandler thought it best to tell no one. And the other characters found out one by one.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: Sensitive Guy to Joey's Manly Man. Generally Joey will sleep with girls for a night and Chandler will make them breakfast the next morning.
Sex God: After some coaching from Monica and Rachel when he dates one of Joey's exes. Later, Monica tells Rachel her new secret boyfriend (Chandler) is the best she ever had.
The Smart Guy: Not as overtly so as Ross, but he is plenty smart as long as Joey isn't influencing him and balances it out but not being overly dictated by his emotions like Ross. He graduated from Columbia and is consistently one of the most intelligent people of the gang such as being able to come up with a plausible trail to how Rachel would find out Ross slept with Chloe in less than 10 seconds.
Smoking Is Cool: Or so he claims.
Chandler: Hey, y'know, I have had it with you guys and your cancer and your emphysema and your heart disease. The bottom line is, smoking is cool, and you know it.
The Snark Knight: He's the resident Deadpan Snarker, but what elevates him to this status is just as many of his barbs are directed at him as other people.
Stepford Snarker: He openly admits to using sarcasm to hide deep insecurity that developed due to his rather unusual and traumatic childhood. His snarking also grows noticeably worse during painful situations such as Ross and Rachel's break up, his parents visiting or friends leaving.
The '40s: The mid-90s saw a flash of nostalgia for the era. Chandler played his part with his bowling shirts and sweater vests in the early seasons.
Took a Level in Badass: Chandler is referenced as being mediocre in bed a couple times over the course of the early seasons, until the famous scene where Monica gives him a diagram-based crash-course in pleasuring the female body. His girlfriend literally runs across the hall to hug and emphatically thank Monica following their next lovemaking session. Ends up being a good call on Monica's part, as when she and Chandler later enter a relationship, she repeatedly describes him as the best sex she's ever had.
Took a Level in Kindness: Because of his upbringing, he used to be kind of a jerk when he was younger (lifting up Susie's skirt in fourth grade or insulting Monica for being fat). In early seasons, he is very cynical and has a hard time showing affection to people, but shows his kind side often enough to be a good guy. After he starts dating Monica, he loses most of his cynicism, and becomes a regularly sweet and devoted boyfriend.
Tough Room: He's considered to be the funniest character on the show, but his friends find his jokes annoying for most of the time. A little justified for a couple of reasons: 1) he makes those jokes all the time meaning his friends are likely going to get tired of them eventually (indeed, they laugh less and lampshade more as time goes on), and 2) he frequently makes his jokes about them, giving them another reason not to laugh.
Trademark Favorite Food: Chandler loves Yoo-Hoo chocolate milk; in addition to scenes that explicitly bring it up as a joke, there's also times during the series where he's drinking it without it being a set-up for a punchline.
Triple Nipple: Had a "nubbin" for the first couple of seasons; after it scared off a girl he was trying to date, he got it removed.
Unable to Cry: An episode entitled "The One Where Chandler Can't Cry" gave him this Compressed Vice, which was somewhat of a retcon because every other time he was considered the most emotional out of the three guys.
Unexplained Recovery: One episode has him making a huge scheme and ending up flying to Yemen to escape his on-again-off-again girlfriend Janice. The next episode does not address how he managed to come back, though one can presume that he simply bought another ticket for a trip back immediately after arriving. Assuming that the return trip cost as much as it did to get there, this means he wasted over $4000 just to get out of dating Janice without having to directly break up with her.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Phoebe in the later seasons. Despite being the Deadpan Snarker, he rarely bites back, hinting he's not that comfortable with her remarks. They share rare sweet moments in "The One with the Ring" and "The One with Phoebe's Wedding", implying they are still good friends.
Wacky Parent, Serious Child: He's far more grounded and responsible than either of his parents.
I Was Quite a Fashion Victim: Chandler had a Flock of Seagulls haircut in his college days. Also, he once won a Vanilla Ice look-alike contest.
What, Exactly, Is His Job?: A Running Gag is that nobody is able to define what he does for a living. He and Joey actually win Monica and Rachel's apartment when they can't answer the question as to what his job is. Monica is finally able to define it when he finally quits.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Season 7 reveals that he's afraid of dogs and doesn't like being around them, something he'd managed to keep secret from everyone except Joey.
You Are What You Hate: Played for laughs when he gets a promotion in his original company in season 1. He ends up acting like the kind of boss he had always complained about and recoils in fear.