Acquired Situational Narcissism: In "The One Where Rachel Goes Back to Work", Phoebe works as an extra in one of Joey's shows and after overcoming her stage fright, becomes overconfident and conceited to the point of even believing that Joey is threatened by her acting.
Afraid of Needles: In one episode, she and Rachel decide to get tattoos, but Phoebe backs out at the last moment when she realizes that it's actually done with needles.
Agent Mulder: Phoebe believes in auras, psychic powers, omens, reincarnation, ghosts and that trees and even objects have feelings.
Ambiguous Criminal History: Part of her Mysterious Past, she is heavily implied to have been imprisoned as a teenager.
Ambiguously Bi: She has dated many men but has also shown attraction to women a number of times, like Ross and Monica's cousin from the eponymous episode or even Rachel and Monica themselves. When she was presented with the hypothetical question of who she would rather have a relationship with between Rachel and Monica, she immediately blurted out "Rachel!" without taking time to think. She also said that Monica had "the breasts of a Greek goddess" with a longing look on her face. In "The One Where Chandler Takes A Bath", she explicitly tells Joey that she has had crushes on all her friends except Ross and Chandler. And then she outright kisses Rachel because she "wanted to see what all the fuss was about".
Badass Adorable: She may be lovable and quirky, but do not underestimate her street badass side. Phoebe is a totally tough girl when she wants to be.
Betty and Veronica: The Archie to Mike's Betty (her current and stable love interest) and David's Veronica (the troubled love from the past), when both men are in love with her in season 9. She chooses Mike.
Beware the Silly Ones: She may seem like a sweet Granola Girl with a kooky sense of humor, but she was tough enough to mug older boys when she was just a teen living on the street.
Brutal Honesty: She can be quite rude and blunt to her friends.
Cain and Abel: The Abel to Ursula's Cain.
Cannot Keep a Secret: Especially when it comes to Monica's secrets.
In "The One with the Blackout", she tells Joey about Monica's crush on him when he was moving in (while Monica gestures at her to shut up).
In "The One Where Dr. Ramoray Dies", she tells Richard that Monica has been with a lot of guys before him.
Monica: Not a lot, Phoebe's kidding, Phoebe's crazy.
In "The One in Vegas", Monica didn't want to tell Chandler that she had lunch with Richard because it would have ruined their anniversary. But then Phoebe asks her in front of Chandler "So you told him about the Richard thing?"
In "The One with the Truth About London", she tells Chandler that Monica originally wanted to sleep with Joey in London, causing another argument between them.
In "The One with the Stripper", she talks about Monica's secret bachelorette party in front of Chandler.
Catchphrase: "Oh no."
Character Development: Though her changes were late in the series, Phoebe eventually decides that she needs to hunker down and be in a serious relationship instead of having one-night stands with random guys. This eventually leads Phoebe to getting married and becoming happy that she finally has something normal in her life.
Characterization Marches On: She starts off as a sweet and well-meaning Cloudcuckoolander character, though she did have some bluntness. By the later seasons, she becomes a lot harsher and more selfish, especially to Ross and Chandler. Her high sex drive also wasn't really present in the first couple of seasons.
Cloudcuckoolander: One of the most well-known examples for a mass-media audience. For instance, she doesn't believe in evolution or gravity, but she does believe in auras, ghosts and omens, and was convinced that her deceased mother's spirit returned in a cat.
Phoebe: Phoebe Buffay. P as in Phoebe, H as in hoebe, O as in oebe, E as in ebe, B as in bee-bee and E as in... 'ello there, mate!
Comically Missing the Point: Not as much as Joey, but she often doesn't understand things that are obvious to the others.
Covert Pervert: Initially, when her "innocence" was more genuine. Then it became less covert and more just part of her character that she was kinky, frequently sharp-tongued and kind of mean.
Cute Bruiser: Easily the best fighter of the girls (even more so than the supposedly strong Monica) and arguably of the entire group. In an episode, she even breaks Joey's nose (the toughest guy of the group). In "The One After the Super Bowl", she breaks off the Cat Fight between Rachel and Monica by grabbing their ears. She lived on the street, after all.
Phoebe: Okay, now I'm gonna kick some ass!
The Cutie: Mostly in early seasons: her quirky, cheerful, and naïve personality combined with Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold and The Pollyanna make her cute.
Dark and Troubled Past: Her stepfather was sent to prison when she was young, her adopted mother was a drug dealer who killed herself, she ended up homeless when she was 14 which forced her to become a mugger and never graduate high school, she has an Ambiguous Criminal History which implies she went to prison or was at least arrested at one point, and casually mentions several traumatic events which add to her Expansion Pack Past.
Depending on the Writer:
Phoebe's level of intelligence could vary greatly depending on the episode. Mostly, she could be a Cloudcuckoolander who, despite her oddness, was otherwise pretty functional. At other times, she could be elevated to being a slightly weird voice of reason or a full-blown Dumb Blonde.
Her level of "innocence" also varies. Sometimes she seems pure and naïve like a child, sometimes she's a friendly but tough girl with a slightly edgy streak, and other times, she's a snide and sexually aggressive Manipulative Bitch.
Her vegetarianism and how stringent her abstinence from animal products is varies as well. Her refusal to eat actual meat is the only real consistency. "The One With The Blackout" implied she also avoids dairy, but plenty of episodes show her eating cheese pizza ("TOW George Stephanopolous,") cookies containing butter and milk chocolate ("TOW Phoebe's Cookies,") and frequently pouring cream in her coffee at Central Perk. One episode had a subplot where she's deeply troubled by the idea of wearing a family-heirloom fur coat she was given, but another featured Monica and Rachel buying her leather pants for a gift to cheer her up because she had been wanting them so badly.
The Ditz: She frequently comes off as a flaky airhead.
Phoebe: I got a call at two in the morning, but all I could hear was, like, this high squeaky sound, so I thought, okay it's, like, a mouse or a possum. But then I realized, like, okay, where would a mouse or a possum get the money to make the phone call?
Dreadful Musician: To some, but she's mostly more of a Dreadful Songwriter. Her lyrics are either terrifyingly banal (like "Smelly Cat") or terrifyingly tasteless (like a Christmas carol she wrote about her mom dying).
Drives Like Crazy: "Hey, I didn't have my license taken away because I drive carefully. Haha."
Dude Magnet: Like Rachel, she picks up numerous guys with ease.
Dumb Blonde: To an extent, but she's more a "ditzy and naïve blonde" who likes to act silly. She's more streetwise than most of the other characters, despite her kooky behavior.
Dysfunctional Family: A fierce competitor with Chandler, given her dad ran away, her mom killed herself, her twin sister hates her, her grandma was weird, and then she met a half-brother who married a much older teacher.
Everyone Loves Blondes: She is the free spirit and fun-loving member of the group. Many men seem to find her attractive.
Expansion Pack Past: Downplayed, but all her comments about her Mysterious Past reveal a complicated and tragic origin for Phoebe. She became homeless when she was 14 (despite being shown to have a close relationship with her grandmother and her sister Ursula apparently not ending up homeless) which led her to start mugging to survive, even mugging Ross at one point which they wouldn't discover until years after they met. She never attended high school or went to college, but picked up enough French and Italian to become pretty fluent and ended up living in Prague at one point. She also mentions getting hepatitis when a pimp spit in her mouth, being chased by an escaped mental patient when she was sixteen who wanted to kill her and was eventually shot by a friend of Phoebe's, implied she's been to prison or at least got arrested in "The One In Vegas, Part 2", learned boxing at a YMCA, and at one point stabbed a cop (he stabbed her first).
Foil: In general, Phoebe tends to be the unconventional contrast to multiple members of the group as she's more free-spirited and honest in comparison to the other friends who tend to hide things as long as possible.
The Gadfly: It's often difficult to discern whether or not her Cloud Cuckoolander moments are her being genuine or just messing with people.
Giftedly Bad: With her songs. Despite her passion for playing guitar and singing, the lyrics of her songs are just as odd as she is.
Good Bad Girl: She tends to reveal many unexpected sexual escapades at the most random times, until season 9 when she started dating Mike.
Go-to Alias: She often uses the name Regina Phalange when she doesn't want to use her real name.
Granola Girl: More in earlier seasons, where it was probably her most obvious personality trait. Slightly less so in later seasons when she ends up a little less hippy and a little more edgy.
Hair of Gold, Heart of Gold: Very downplayed. She has light blonde hair and a wide-eyed look on the world similar to a child's, but certainly isn't innocent.
Hard-Drinking Party Girl: Not often, but it comes up now and then. When she went to a charity event, her idea of helping the kids was to drain the bar so the kids wouldn't drink it. In a flashback to Monica's 30th birthday, where she turns up drunk, Phoebe happily says she'll get twice as drunk so that no one notices.
Head-Tiltingly Kinky: Some of her humor derives from the fact that her sexual practices have no boundaries.
Heterosexual Life-Partners: With Monica and Rachel. Despite knowing them less than they know each other, she develops a strong friendship with both of them as the series progresses.
Hidden Depths:
She spoke to Joey's grandmother in Italian. Even Phoebe was unaware of her skill.
She knows French... from learning it in a street corner with some other people, presumably.
She demonstrates her knowledge of wines when Rachel's father berates a waiter for serving the '74 Lafite instead of the '75, then storms off.
Rachel: In case you didn't notice, that is a scary man.
Phoebe: He's right, though. The '74 is absolute piss.
Home Nudist: Has admitted to doing this while living alone.
Phoebe: Why do you think it takes me so long to answer the door?
Hypocrisy Nod: One episode has Phoebe receiving a fur coat, even though she's the first one of the six to be for animal rights, and despite her initial reluctance she quickly starts wearing it and loves it. Then she suddenly runs across a squirrel that's staring at her, leading her to admit she's gone against everything she stood for and throw the coat away.
The Ingenue: Downplayed. She comes off as very naïve and Still Believes in Santa, at least until Joey reveals the truth to her. But she is not as pure as she seems (see Good Bad Girl) and has a mean streak.
Insane Troll Logic: She thrives on this! For example, in "The One with the Cat", she tries to justify her belief that a stray cat is the reincarnated spirit of her mother by explaining that her guitar case is lined with orange felt. Her mom's favorite fish, meanwhile, was orange ruffy. Cats like fish. Soooooooooooo...
In-Series Nickname: Pheebs, though she didn't get it for a while.
Phoebe: [to Rachel] Oh, Pheebs.
Rachel: Honey, that's your name.
Phoebe: That's short for Phoebe? I thought that's just what we called each other.
Ironic Name: Phoebe means "bright", but Pheebs herself is a major case of a Cloudcuckoolander.
Irrational Hatred: She dislikes Mona for some inexplicable reason, listing her alongside Janice as one of her friends' more questionable love interests. Ross outright asks what was wrong with Mona, and the others are just as confused as he is.
Jerkass to One: A downplayed example when it comes to Ross and Chandler. Joey is her favorite, she usually gets along with Monica and Rachel, but is a lot more harsh and critical to Ross and Chandler. With Ross it's zig-zagged, and while she can be rude to him, she's also supportive of his relationship with Rachel. Also, in the first four seasons, she's a relatively good friend to Chandler, but after he starts dating Monica, she becomes dismissive of him for some reason.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She's far from a bad person and obviously loves her friends, but she definitely has a mean streak and can be downright bitchy and rude in later episodes.
Large Ham: Sometimes. Helps she's enthusiastic and prone to yelling. In one episode, she and Ross go over the top when they read the lines of one of Joey' scripts.
Light Feminine and Dark Feminine: The Light Feminine (cheerful Manic Pixie Dream Girl who wears bright clothes) to Ursula's Dark Feminine (Femme Fatale who wears black).
Like Brother and Sister: With Chandler in early episodes, being both the goofy, playful members of the group, they have fun with each other and often spend time together. Over time, this becomes the dynamic of Phoebe's friendship with Joey for the rest of the show, while she and Chandler turn into The Friends Who Never Hang.
Likes Older Men:
Quite a few times. She has shown attraction to both Monica's dad in "The One Where Ross Got High" and Rachel's dad in "The One with the Stripper". In "The One with Joey's New Brain", she competes with Rachel over who gets to keep a phone who belonged to a young attractive guy, but when an elderly man later comes to claim the phone, she happily goes to dinner with him, claiming he's even more attractive than the young guy.
When she meets Richard for the first time, she compares him to James Bond, and is reduced to insensate giggles when he politely asks how she is.
In "The One Where Chandler Takes A Bath", she brings up Lee Majors (who was in his 60s at the time) as an example of a celebrity she finds attractive.
Manic Pixie Dream Girl: She seems to act as this to the rest of the group, as well as in most of her relationships. Notably, the group occasionally finds her actions annoying or intrusive, and in the 10th season, Phoebe admits that she has never been in a relationship which lasted more than a month. Occasionally, being a Manic Pixie Dream Girl seems to actively work against her, such as the first time she was ready to move in with a man, and then broke up with him shortly after he impulsively shot a bird with his handgun. On another occasion, she ends a relationship because her boyfriend is even more of a Manic Pixie Dream Guy than she is, and she can't stand him.
The McCoy: Of the women. She's The McCoy to Rachel's The Kirk and Monica's The Spock.
Meta Girl: Not exactly the Only Sane Woman, but was always the one to point out the show's clichés, like the amount of gay jokes Chandler makes or the First-World Problems Rachel has with Ross.
Mirror Character: To Ross, while also being a Foil. Both characters are a little more isolated from the friend dynamic; Monica and Rachel are childhood best friends and roommates, while Chandler and Joey are best friends and also roommates for half of the series which leaves Ross and Phoebe a little on the wayside since they live further away from the rest of the group. They're also portrayed as the characters with "quirkier" interests that the rest of the group doesn't care about (Phoebe in general, Ross with paleontology). In certain episodes, it's shown that Ross actually understands how Phoebe thinks, whereas Phoebe is the only one who appreciates Ross' musical pursuits (with the bagpipes and the keyboards).
My Sister Is Off-Limits:
She's unhappy when Joey starts dating her twin sister Ursula, but in a twist on the trope, it's not Ursula she's worried about. Her concern is that when Ursula inevitably dumps Joey, he'll be so hurt he won't want to be friends with Phoebe anymore, as she'll remind him of Ursula.
When her younger half-brother gets engaged to his old elementary school teacher, she becomes a little concerned. She tries to "help him" by breaking her brother up with his fiancée. Unfortunately, the breakup leads to her brother becoming depressed.
Mysterious Past: Ultimately her teenage years where she was homeless are a mystery, as is why she wasn't living with her grandmother or why Ursula seemingly never ended up homeless based on how she acquired things like their birth certificates and mother's suicide note. Her multiple comments and stories about her past have led her to develop a sort of Expansion Pack Past.
Nice Girl: In earlier seasons, she is the nicest of the three girls, despite her oddity. She becomes a lot less nice by the end of the series, but still has her kind moments.
The Not-Love Interest: To Joey, often hinting about potentially being together in a future. Besides some isolated kisses, they never actually dated, never had sex and in fact, Joey ends up introducing Phoebe to her husband to-be.
Opposites Attract: With Mike. He's pretty normal and she is quirky.
Parental Abandonment: Has lost more parents than most people have: her birth mother leaves, her biological father walked out on them, her adoptive mother died, and her adoptive mother's second husband was in jail... And, as the page quote reminds us, all this happened before she was 15.
Past-Life Memories: She claims to remember losing her arm on Thanksgiving during the Civil War and again during World War I.
Ping Pong Naïveté: Since she's frequently shown to be quite clever, quick-witted and Street Smart, you may think that all her moments of ditzy idiocy are just Obfuscating Stupidity.
Platonic Life-Partners: With Joey. They playfully flirt, they have a softness for each other (often both of them picking the other over the rest of the group), they have a lot of Ship Tease, including at least four kisses, yet they never dated (or had sex) in all ten years, and aside from their jokes about being a possible couple in the future, it was clear that they just wanted to be friends, but nothing more. They even keep a pact until Phoebe's wedding to Mike to get married if they are both still single when they're forty.note 
Playing the Victim Card: She occasionally uses her mother's suicide when she wants the others to feel bad for her, or to get out of trouble when she makes mistakes. The rest of the gang eventually wise up to this and call her out on it.
Phoebe: Ohh, I lost my mom to suicide.
Rachel: Okay no way, you cannot use that to get the cute guy and the last blueberry muffin.
Phoebe: Did I use that already today? I'm sorry.
The Pollyanna: Very cheerful and upbeat, despite her Dark and Troubled Past. This was in fact how Lisa Kudrow saw her - taking inspiration from a friend with a similar attitude - that Phoebe would find joy in any situation and even if she couldn't "ploughing through it anyway."
Progressively Prettier: Not that she was ever presented as 'ugly', but her early fashion sense was more quirky and close to a Granola Girl, but she later became presented as just as fashionable and attractive as Rachel and Monica.
Psychic Powers: Implied and Played for Laughs. During one pre-opening credits scene, everyone's thoughts are given voice-overs. Joey's thoughts are a random tune. Phoebe's thoughts ask "Who's singing?"
Really Gets Around: Almost at Joey's level. She tends to reveal many unexpected sexual escapades at the most random times, until season 9 when she started dating Mike.
Running Gag: "Regina Phalange." Even acts as a Chekhov's Gun so that Ross can say good-bye to Rachel in the season finale.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: Energetic Girl to Mike's Savvy Guy.
Shipper on Deck:
She is clearly a Ross/Rachel shipper. According to her, Ross is Rachel's "lobster" (the person you are supposed to be with the rest of your life). Even when they aren't dating she's always the first to believe that they have still feelings for each other (in season 6 and again in season 9) and she's also the one who drives Ross to the airport, to convince Rachel to stay, in the last episode. That said, though, she is also the one who (unsuccessfully) attempts to convince Rachel not to go to London to crash Ross' wedding to Emily and declare her love for him.
Inverted when it comes to Chandler/Monica. Possibly because she doesn't seem to be a big fan of Chandler in later seasons. She even tried to introduce Monica to her "soulmate" when she was already married to Chandler! This could be due to being a Green-Eyed Monster as she's realizing she wants a committed relationship and is jealous of how happy Monica and Chandler are together.
Phoebe: [when she finds out that Chandler and Monica are together] I think it's great! ... For him. She might be able to do better.
Smarter Than You Look: She acts like a ditz, but is definitely not stupid. She's Street Smart and can speak two foreign languages.
Soapbox Sadie: Often rails against cruelty to animals and preservation of nature but she sometimes falls short.
Still Believes in Santa: Phoebe (the kookiest of the titular friends) and Joey get into a debate about whether completely selfless good deeds exist or not, with Joey taking the side of them not existing. While making his point, he mentions "the deal with Santa Claus". Later, Phoebe follows up on that remark to make sure Joey meant that Santa Claus doesn't exist. After getting the confirmation, Phoebe spends a few moments staring wide-eyed into space.
Street Smart: She is not well educated and lacks knowledge in other areas, but she spent some of her childhood on the street and gained a lot of knowledge from it.
Street Urchin: From the age of 14.
Suckiness Is Painful: Phoebe is a terrible guitar player and singer, mostly for the comedy, but also because Kudrow hated learning to play the guitar and got out of it by insisting that because Phoebe is supposed to suck, it's okay if she only knows two and a half chords.
The Tease: Very flirtatious, often just for the fun of it. She flirts with Joey (who is just as flirty as her, to the point of Ship Tease), and also with Chandler in later seasons (oddly, she never did it before he started dating Monica).
Telepathy: At one point when the everyone's thoughts are heard, she shows the ability to hear Joey singing in his head.
Took a Level in Dumbass: In Season 1 she showed a lot of social savvy being able to navigate the workplace dynamics at Chandler's corporate job to the point she understands them better than him. Come Season 9, she can barely talk to Mike's upper class parents without making an idiot of herself.
Took a Level in Jerkass: Towards the end, she can be very mean to both Chandler and Ross.
Town Girls: The Neither to Rachel's Femme and Monica's Butch.
Unconventional Wedding Dress: When she and Mike get married her wedding dress is lavender rather than the typical white. The color choice fits her quirky, unconventional style and also reflects the fact that this isn't her first time getting married.
Vitriolic Best Buds: With Ross and Chandler, especially in later seasons. But while Ross seems to enjoy their squabbling, Chandler - despite being the Deadpan Snarker - rarely bites back, hinting he's not that comfortable with her remarks.
Wacky Cravings: Being an ethical vegetarian, she's horrified when she starts craving meat while pregnant in season four. She tries to trick her body with meat substitutes like tofu but they still make her nauseous. Joey eventually offers to give up eating meat for the rest of her pregnancy to balance out the karma of her eating meat.
Weird Aside: She often begins a story with "When I was living on the streets..." or "When my mother killed herself..." - The titular friends take it in stride (after all, they already know about Phoebe's mother and life story), new acquaintances do not. Also, when Phoebe was a surrogate mother she liked to freak people out by talking about having her brother's baby.
Rachel: I am so going to miss watching you freak people out like that!
Weirdness Magnet: Having the ghost of an old woman possess her, being chased around a junkyard by a psychotic, being stalked by men who mistake her for her twin sister, Ursula, and having her apartment haunted by her grandmother.
With Friends Like These...: With Chandler in later seasons.
Possibly lamsphaded by Chandler in season 10, when Phoebe and Monica have a fight.
Monica: We are not friends with Phoebe anymore.
Chandler: If she asks, I protested a little, but okay!
Womanchild: Phoebe has a childishly naïve outlook towards life (even with her crappy childhood) and still believes in fantasy figures such as Santa Claus.
Women Prefer Strong Men: While she has dommy qualities herself, she made it clear that she wasn't a big fan of soft/sissy guys and got the most hot for Mike when he was beating Monica at ping-pong. It’s most telling in one episode when Monica immediately goes about waiting to spend all of Chandler’s money (the exact number isn’t show, but it’s implied to be a LOT), and when Chandler puts his foot down and refuses to spend it on a “party” Phoebe OPENLY shows an attraction to him.” Phoebe: Money AND a firm hand. Now this is a Chandler I can get on board with!”