Afraid of Blood: Alex Fainting at the sight of blood is a bit of a Running Gag. It gets to the point where, in the episode Heart Broken," a peeved Claire doesn't even bother to turn around when Alex faints; her only reaction is just an annoyed "Haley, revive your sister."
Allegedly Dateless: She has many boyfriends and admirers, but often, her family acts like she's always alone and never gets any dates.
Book Smart: Alex is academic and studious, in contrast to her Book Dumb siblings.
Brainy Brunette: The most academically successful of her siblings.
Butt-Monkey: Perhaps to offset her snobbery about feeling smarter than everyone, she's often this. Notable examples include her humiliating herself trying to get a picture of Haley doing community service, the entire episode where the rest of the Dunphys try to get her to leave the house for the summer because they think she's bad luck, and the episode where Phil and Claire assume she's making up her boyfriends.
Character Development: Throughout the show, she has shown her vulnerable side, showing that she too has struggles and hard times, like that of her siblings. Additionally, her once rocky relationship with Haley has immensely developed, with them being able to confide in each other sincerely.
Cool Big Sis: She and Haley are this to Lily, which is funny because they're both ten times better sister figures to their adopted cousin than they are to their own younger brother.
Deadpan Snarker: Usually makes quips at Haley's apparent lack of intelligence.
Determinator: In "Someone To Watch Over Lily", she reveals that she hates playing cello but continues to do so because she's never quit anything in her life.
Disappointing Older Sibling: To a slightly lesser extent than Haley is towards Luke, who even outright tells them that neither one of them are good older sisters.
Disproportionate Retribution: Her actions towards Luke in "Truth Be Told" is started because of Luke making a harmless pun about her.
Dude Magnet: Just like her sister, a lot of guys fall for her throughout the show: Reuben, Jimmy Scrivano, Jason Darling, Sanjay Patel, Alec, Teddy, Ben, Bill, Dwight, and Arvin. In "Games Prople Play", she says she used to be dating two guys at once. In "After the Fire", it’s shown that a lot of nerdy boys at her school have a crush on her.
Extracurricular Enthusiast: She plays the cello, plays lacrosse, and has participated in a bottle-collection program to help build schools in third-world countries. Note that she doesn't do all this because she loves all the activities, but rather to pad her resume for when she has to apply for colleges.
Foolish Sibling, Responsible Sibling: The Responsible one to Haley's Foolish.
Geeky Turn-On: In one episode, she let slip that she has a fantasy about being kissed in the science museum.
Give Geeks a Chance: Subverted. She starts dating Luke's geeky friend, Reuben, but not because she likes anything about him, but simply because she's depressed and wants an easy relationship with someone who pretty much worships the ground she walks on.
The Glorious War of Sisterly Rivalry: With Haley. Alex is the smart one; Haley is the pretty one.
Godiva Hair: A non-nude version. Since her actress has matured, her character has been limited to a single hairstyle (see character image) in an effort to hide her figure.
Green-Eyed Monster: In some episodes such as "See You Next Fall", she’s shown to be very jealous of Haley for being beautiful, popular, and attracting a lot of guys.
Haley: You think you have everyone figured out, but everybody has their stuff.
Alex: What "stuff" do you have? Too many boys chasing after you? Too many parties?
Hidden Buxom: She has become rather well-endowed as she has matured — a fact which is much less obvious than with Haley as Alex commonly wears things like over-sized sweatshirts and the aforementioned Godiva Hair. Even when the character is trying to appear attractive, she tends to avoid anything that would highlight her chest.
Hidden Depths:
"Best Men" reveals, much to Claire and Haley's surprise, that her band in which she plays cello is more alt rock rather than classical and that Alex can sing.
"Under Pressure" reveals that even though she loves challenging herself and being super smart, she's also under a lot of pressure. When Claire goes to Alex's school open house and finally realizes how hard Alex works every single day, Alex actually cries at hearing her mom tell her she understands.
I Am Not Pretty: In "Come Fly With Me" and "Closet Con ‘13", Alex says she doesn’t think she’s pretty and that she thinks Haley and Gloria are far more attractive than her, despite Gloria assuring her that she’s beautiful.
Idiot Ball: In "A Tale Of Three Cities", she and her siblings are not the least suspicious that their parents are having sex as they are too busy hiding the fact that they were still in New York.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: Beneath her smug and condescending demenour, she's terrified of failure and sees herself as worthless in every area other than intelligence. Every time she's failed at an intellectual task, even a minor one, she's had a near meltdown - in a later season, she mentions that she still has nightmares over a puzzle she failed to solve as a child.
Insufferable Genius: Tends to believe that she's the only one who's in the right and often cracks jokes at Haley's poor grades.
Intelligence Equals Isolation: Despite her great intellect, she doesn't have a great social life.
Jerkass: Alex is by far the meanest of the Dunphy siblings, especially in the first season where she seems to take some sort of sadistic joy in seeing her siblings miserable. When Luke is in trouble she "casually" mentions that some parents think it's okay to hit their children, and later when she overhears what she thinks is Phil actually hitting Luke, she walks away with the most self-satisfied smirk ever. She is toned somewhat down later on in the show, and her attitude explained as being rooted in her insecurities, but she's still completely merciless, and sometimes crosses the line to straight up cruelty, when she insults her siblings.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Despite being a bit of a Deadpan Snarker and Insufferable Genius, Alex has her heart in the right place at the end of the day.
Little Miss Snarker: Gets it from her mother... her uncle... her grandfather... let's just say it's a Pritchett thing.
Nerd Glasses: Wears glasses to showcase her nerdiness.
Nerds Are Sexy: She gets her fair share of attention from boys. When Haley first sees her fanclub of nerdy boys, Alex smiles and tells her "You have your fans, I have mine. Someday, yours will be working for mine." A lot of other guys get a crush on her throughout the show’s run and once her actress, Ariel Winter, grows up, Alex becomes a beautiful, buxom young woman.
Not So Above It All: Case in point, she once tried to pass off as a medical student and passed out after seeing a C-section.
Can improvise on the fly when she needs to like the rest of her family when the situation calls for it.
In "Under Pressure", she reveals that she suffers from mammoth pressure at school.
Obliviously Beautiful: Although she thinks she’s not pretty, she grows into a beautiful young woman and attracts about as many guys as Haley throughout the show.
Omnidisciplinary Scientist: Or at least one in training. While her nominal degree is in biochemistry, she's seen doing work in areas as diverse as robotics, particle physics and psychology as part of her academic career. Maybe she just takes a lot of electives.
Only Sane Woman:
She sometimes acts like this among her siblings due to Haley's irresponsible nature and Luke's strange thinking.
"The Long Honeymoon" reveals her to be this for her entire family. Not only are they incapable of functioning without her, but they are one mistake away from getting killed unless she is there to guide them. That isn't an exaggeration — Phil nearly kills them all by feeding them a pie he made which he made from rhubarb and forgot to remove the leaves, which Alex points out are poisonous.
Phil: You can’t leave us, we’re a danger to ourselves.
Shaking Her Hair Loose: In "After the Fire", she undoes her ponytail and shakes her hair loose in front of a group of nerds who have crushes on her to seduce them before she stops them from bullying Luke and Manny.
She Cleans Up Nicely: While she's normally considered (at least in-universe) the less attractive of the Dunphy sisters, several characters have mentioned how pretty she can be when she puts effort into her appearence.
Smart People Wear Glasses: She's the most down to earth member of her family and wears glasses.
Stepford Snarker: Her mother tells Cam and Mitchell that Alex may be sarcastic on the outside, but inside she's a "fragile little girl".
Surrounded by Idiots: Frequently, and she doesn't hesitate to inform her family that she thinks of her situation as such.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The Tomboy to Haley's Girly Girl. However, while Haley's girly girl is definitely the case, Alex's tomboy is mostly only implied, with the aspects of it, such as her being a lacrosse player, only being mentioned and not shown.
Tomboyish Name: Everyone calls her "Alex" which is short for Alexandra.
Troll: She has a cruel sense of humor when she puts her mind to it.
In several episodes she's seen tricking her siblings, making them think she's being nice by "teaching" them things like how you can recharge a cell phone by rubbing it against your hair for static electricity.
When Phil's ex comes to visit, Alex tells Luke that he's adopted, she's his real mom, and she's come to take him away.  A few jokes from the ex about how she wants to take him home, and he's bawling like a baby.
Haley: Just cause he called you a door-to-dork salesman?
When Haley leaves for college, not only do Alex's pranks against Luke get worse  (to the point of physical pain), she starts mocking her mother more openly.  Claire eventually realizes the problem is that they can’t snark back on an even level.  She solves the problem by setting up a video chat with Haley, then just leaving them alone while they insult and yell at each other.
Claire: And balance... is restored.
The Un-Favorite: It doesn't come up often, but due to her increased intellect compared to her parents and siblings, she sometimes feels ostracized in her family, but make no mistake, Phil and Claire may have better chances of relating to Haley and Luke, that doesn't mean they don't love Alex immensely.