Action Dad: Despite Cameron being overly dramatic and somewhat effeminate, when he thinks there's a stranger in Baby Lily's room he jumps out of bed, grabs a baseball bat, and charges in with a Pre-Asskicking One-Liner.
In one episode, when he thought there was a stranger in Lily's room, he jumped out of bed, grabbed a bat, said "It's go time" with a Serious Business look on his face, and charged in ready to KILL whoever was in there (fortunately, no one was). In another episode, when Mitch almost gets into a fight with a rude Jerkass at a gas station, Cam gets out of the car and tells the guy he will "slam [his] head into that bumper so hard the airbag will deploy" if he didn't apologize. The guy apologized with genuine fear in his eyes. (Also, Cam was dressed up as Fizbo the clown during this scene, which just makes it more awesome somehow.)
In one episode, he gets so pissed off over his extended family being good friends with Mitchell's ex, Teddy, that he punches a punching bag arcade game hard enough to set a record.
All Gays Love Theater: Loves musicals and jumps at the chance to direct Luke and Manny's school play, attempting to turn it into a fabulous affair. He even says he would have liked to call his adaptation "Cameron Tucker's Andrew Lloyd Webber's The Phantom of the Opera.''
Attention Whore: At his worst moments, he can come across as one, making everything about him and wanting every approval and attention he can get of anyone.
Beware the Silly Ones: Camp, flamboyant and overdramatic he might be, but he's clearly shown that he's able to step it up when needed. When he thought that Lily was in danger, he immediately charged the room with a baseball bat.
Big Eater: Him being a big eater is the reason why he's overweight.
Cameron: I got [an ice pack] from the freezer.
Mitchell: Why do you have chocolate on your face?
Cameron: It was under a chocolate pie.
Mitchell: So you ate your way through it?
Cameron: I made a judgment call, you weren't there!
Big Fun: Cam is corpulent, affable, jolly and proudly camp.
Breakout Character: Cameron is the 2nd most popular character in the show after Phil. The fans just can't get enough of him.
Camp Gay: Zig-zagged. While his mannerisms, fashion sense, and Drama Queen nature are very camp, he actually has a lot of very masculine hobbies. He coaches football, is excellent at home repair, and since he grew up on a farm, he is very comfortable wrangling animals, getting dirty, and being outdoors.
Can't Take Criticism: Cam becomes angry and defensive, or even dissolves into a sobbing mess when he perceives the slightest bit of criticism thrown his way, particularly around his body or weight.
Chick Magnet:
Before coming out, he apparently caught the attention of quite a few girls, as he likes to brag about.
Also attempts this on a bet with Mitchell and Crispin - though, with his extremely camp personality and mannerisms, the girl he was hitting on knew he was gay all along, despite his beliefs to the contrary. She just wanted a gay best friend.
Crouching Moron, Hidden Badass: A metaphorical and literal clown who's mostly the overly emotional Drama Queen, but he's also one of the most physically capable members of the family and very willing to throw down with anyone who threatens his family.
Deadpan Snarker: Yep. Cam has a witty putdown for just about every occasion.
The Ditz: He's not very used to city life, and is prone to misunderstandings and stupid impulsive decisions. That said, when we see the couple in a rural enviroment, the dynamic inverts and it's Mitchell who ends up making the messes while Cam tells him what to do.
Drama Queen: Sweet Jesus, yes. He's sterotypically campy and dramatic in actions and expressions, and prone to dramatic meltdowns over every minor inconvience.
Genre Refugee: Him and Mitchell become this trope briefly in "Baby On Boards". They're characters from an American Sitcom but briefly step into a Telenovela full of attractive people and dramatic plot twists, such as one man faking his death while secretly looking out for a woman's family. Ironically, Cam is shown to be a fan of these types of shows, much to Mitchell's annoyance.
Happily Married: Initially Averted, in that while he and Mitchell were as happy as the other two couples on the show they couldn't legally marry. Played Straight as of the Season 5 finale.
House Husband: Has been one for most of the series' run, although he was a music teacher before adopting Lily, a job which he eventually returns to (this time at Luke and Manny's school) once she starts kindergarten. He also briefly worked in a greeting card shop while Mitchell was unemployed. Later, he becomes the high school football coach to which he takes to quite well as it's one of his other great loves.
Inferiority Superiority Complex: He acts very full of himself and he likes showing off what he thinks are amazing skills. But than and when it is shown throughout the show he might be very insecure and acts the way he does to get everyone's approval.
It's All About Me: Cam will take any opportunity he can to make things about him, even when he's not even remotely the subject of attention. In "A Year of Birthdays", Mitchell makes clear he does not want a party for his birthday, but Cam wants to throw him one and plans a surprise party behind his back, even telling their friends that "Just as I hoped, Mitchell is miserable" as his husband spends his birthday alone. This backfires when Mitchell tells Cam that spending his birthday alone is everything he hoped it would be and genuinely thanks Cam for listening to him, causing the surprise party Cam wanted to completely fall flat.
Jerkass Has a Point: in the "Big Game" Cam's football team is playing against a team who lost their coach the night before, and Manny thinks they should just roll over and let them have the win out of pity, and while Cam mostly said this because he wanted the win, he wasn't completely wrong when he said that they could either roll over and let them have an empty win that their coach would have hated, or they could be a team he'd be proud to lose to.
Large Ham: Literally presents his daughter to sound of The Lion King in the show's pilot.
Magical Queer: Played with in Cameron's urge to solve anyone's personal problem that he might stumble across (to the point of hosting a wedding).
Masculine–Feminine Gay Couple: Depends. Cam is the Feminine because he's been described as being more camp and "momish" and he does tend to spoil Lily. However he could be the Masculine because he does have more skill in "manly" things than Mitchell.
Momma's Boy: Among his parents, Cam is closer to his mother. He even refers to himself as a "momma's boy".
Papa Wolf: He threatened to harm a kindergarten-age boy for pulling on Lily's hair.
Performance Artist: He'll take any opportunity to be on stage, is a trained musician and treats his clownery like serious art. Also, yes, he's gay as sunshine.
Screams Like a Little Girl: Generally when Lily is in trouble. He is actually mistaken for Mitchell's panicking wife on the phone when Lily is trapped in a car. Or in any other instance, he’ll just let out a loud and high pitch scream for the sake of it, which growing up he even used to call over pigs. His mom proudly states he has the loudest call in the dry-county area. Then at one incident, he just screamed just so he can out-beat an actual little girl after she stole Stella. Then it cuts to Jay and Manny—
Jay: What the hell sound is that?
Manny: Coyotes must have gotten a cat.
She Cleans Up Nicely: For all the jokes about his weight, it's acknowledged in-universe in Season 4 (by Jay, no less!) that Cam looks great after he rejoins his gym and finds the confidence to start wearing fitted suits. Though in Jay's case, he played football and knew Cam used to be a football lineman and thus actually has a better idea of what a muscular man looks like compared to someone working out for appearances.
Significant Birth Date: His birthday being February 29 is at the center of episode 17 of season 3 Leap Day.
Stout Strength: Can't relate to Mitchell's memories of being picked last in gym class, as a young man he once threw a dodgeball through plywood and broke it.
Stupid Sexy Friend: In Season 6, he wonders if Phil is sexy after seeing him threaten a realtor.