0% Approval Rating: Despite craving approval from her employees almost as desperately as she craves approval from her father, she never catches a break from her subordinates, and her attempts to bridge the gap only make things worse.
A-Cup Angst: She's not that insecure about her chest size, but it's a gag that she feels inadaquate when compared to the buxom Gloria. In the episode "Dance Dance Revelation" she stuffs her bra so people will pay attention to her and not to Gloria and in the episode "iSpy", one of Haley's photos features Claire enviously looking at Gloria's cleavage (in a recreation of the famous Sophia Loren side-eying Jayne Mansfield snapshot).
Gloria: Claire, I didn't come here to steal your thunder. Your thunder is your thunder and my thunder is my thunder.
Claire: I know, it's just that [gesturing at Gloria's chest] God gave you so much "thunder".
The Alcoholic: Played for Laughs. Claire really likes her wine. When discussing the time Phil proposed, Claire's memory was being in a bad mood because she was on "day two of a St Patrick's day hangover".
Antics-Enabling Wife: Claire rarely stands in the way of Phil's Manchild proclivities, be it his magic act, Homemade Inventions, odd collections, or his "Didn't Think This Through" large purchases/major household decisions, which tends to conflict with her otherwise Control Freak characterization. However, unlike many examples, she is perfectly willing to help fix the situation and numerous episodes have Phil's shenanigans lead to an overall positive outcome that wouldn't have happened had Claire intervened (or, sometimes, despite her intervention).
Best Woman: She's "Best Person" for Mitch at his wedding to Cam, something she can't resist punning on throughout her speech.
Big Sister Bully: Mitchell has said that Claire was bossy and mean growing up. This hasn't been the case now that they're adults.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: A more rounded and sympathetic version than most. Weirdly, overlaps with Jerk with a Heart of Gold at times.
Butt-Monkey: Considering the way everyone in her family casually fling insults at her, especially her husband, apparently without even noticing, she definitely qualifies. Also ties into The Complainer Is Always Wrong below. She is also always tripping, falling over, getting knocked into things, getting things spilled on her, etc.
Character Development: Later seasons has her becoming less controlling, especially in regards to her children. The later seasons also has her forming a better relationship with Gloria.
Character Tics: When she's agitated and/or stressed, she moves her hands around.
The Complainer Is Always Wrong: You can bet that if Claire says something is going to go wrong, her kids and Phil will ignore it. When it does (and it usually does), instead of admitting it and listening to her the next time, you can bet they're just going to complain about how she always thinks she's right and ignore her like always.
Control Freak: She takes over every parent activity at her kids' school very seriously, which makes her butt heads with Gloria on a regular basis. She also acts bossy to her husband and tries to control Haley’s dating life and make her spend less time partying and more time studying. Haley even called her a “psycho control freak” once. In "The Last Walt" she tried to control how Luke grieved over Walt after he died.
Cool Big Sis: To Mitchell; they usually go to each other when one is having a problem.
Cute and Psycho: Claire is quite overzealous when it comes to horror, specifcially on Halloween.
Daddy's Girl: In comparison to Mitchell, Claire is closer to Jay.
Dating What Daddy Hates: Though Jay and Phil have reached some stable ground.
Deadpan Snarker: Claire has a dry sense of humor like her dad and brother.
Enraged by Idiocy: This is the main reason why she can’t stand Dylan. Ironic considering her husband is rather ditzy himself.
Former Teen Rebel: As a teen, she described herself as "out of control". One example involved a situation where she and her current boyfriend got arrested after skinny dipping in someone's pool. This is obviously the reason why she is so hard on Haley. While she refuses to admit it openly, she sees so much of herself in Haley, and doesn't want her to make the same mistakes she did.
Happily Married: While she does find Phil childish and slightly odd, Claire is still very much deeply in love.
Holiday Aficionado: Claire's favorite holiday is Halloween. She goes all out with scary decorations and costumes, to the point where she goes overboard one year, making children cry and giving one grown adult a heart attack. This results in their neighborhood starting a petition to get Claire to get rid of all the scary decorations the following year and be more "family friendly".
Alex: We can't even carve a pumpkin?
Claire: The petition was very specific.
Housewife: She put any career she had at the time on hold when she became pregnant with Haley, choosing to stay at home so she can raise her children while Phil works, though she takes on a variety of community projects on the side, and is desperate for a job. She gets a job in season 5 at her dad's company
Jerkass Ball: She can be borderline abusive at times. In the Episode Benched, when Alex dares to ask for more money, she gives it to her, then decides to humilate her infront of her friends, and even says something like "teach her to screw with me".
Much worse is in Treehouse. Haley complains she doesn't have any obstacles in her life to write about and says Claire made her life too easy. Claire gets mad enough she takes her out to the middle of nowhere, claiming she wants to show her something, and then leaves her stranded there. While Haley gets home fine, considering she could have easily gotten lost or kidnapped, this would probably count as child endangerment in real life. Annoyingly, Claire never gets in any trouble for this.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Her callousness causes a lot of problems with others. She has her moments of compassion and selflessness despite her mean streak.
Mama Bear: Better not upset any of her kids, or she'll go after you hard.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy:
The former in comparison to Phil. She tends to be the stricter parent and isn't above playing rough, both literally and figuratively.
With Mitchell, since she was a bit of a tomboy growing up while Mitchell was fairly effeminate.
Ms. Fanservice: Claire is in good shape and there were a couple of instances of her (almost) being shown naked.
Nightmare Fetishist: Absolutely. The marriage proposal ideas she pitches to Mitchell are nothing short of cruel (yet she finds them romantic).
Nightmare Fuel Station Attendant: On Halloween, due to her drive to have the scariest house in the neighborhood. She is usually far, far out ahead of any competition.
Not So Above It All: She can be just as immature as her children, as insensitive as Jay, and as goofy as Phil.
Parental Fashion Veto: She is this when it comes to Haley. The first episode had her commenting on Haley's short skirt. This becomes a Running Gag in a Halloween episode, where she disapproves of every Halloween costume that Haley tries on. To her credit, she justifies this by telling Haley that she is going to save her from a night of constantly being hit on.
Parental Neglect: Out of her kids, Claire focuses most of her concern over Haley's life. One episode involved her constantly focus on Haley's laziness that she doesn't notice that a sleep-deprived Alex wandering around the house reading a textbook. It takes a open house at Alex's school for her to finally learn how much pressure Alex has to deal with.
Parenting the Husband: Claire generally refers to Phil as "the kid she's married to". She even says to this Gloria.
Claire: I live with four teenagers, you live with two adults.
Shotgun Wedding: It's eventually revealed that she and Phil decided to get married after learning Claire was pregnant with Haley.
Stacy's Mom:
Dylan admits directly to her if he weren't dating Haley and Phil were out of the picture, he'd totally marry her.
It also comes up in "Chirp", where it comes up that Dylan had a wet dream involving Haley and Claire. Together. In his defense, he felt really guilty about it.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The Tomboy to Gloria's Girly Girl.
Claire: [pointing at Gloria] I'd like to see this one without make-up.
Gloria: If you do, that will be the last thing you will ever see.
The Un-Favorite: To her mother, Dede, who constantly talks down to her, brings up her past mistakes whenever she visits, and generally just does everything she can to annoy and embarrass Claire just For the Evulz.
Uptight Loves Wild: She's a highly controlling and serious person who married Manchild and Keet Phil.
Walking Techbane: Claire is not good with technology.