Adoptive Peer Parent: To her step-children, Claire and Mitchell. She is actually younger than Claire, as a few characters love to remind Claire.
All Girls Want Bad Boys: Deconstructed. She was once very attracted to the unpredictable Javier, her now ex-husband. But, after having Manny, she realized she needed someone who would be more reliable and not leave her and Manny, especially the latter, hanging on empty promises.
Ambiguous Criminal History: She has supposedly been deported twice and is hinted to have worked with her father in a cartel.
Attention Whore: This flamboyant woman very much enjoys the limelight, as she makes effort to be noticeable especially when it comes to her appearance and tends to get jealous when other women get more attention than her.
Berserk Button: She has several.
Another woman stealing the limelight from her can set her off.
Don’t insult her appearance or intelligence. Just don’t.
Harming or even insulting her family, especially her kids, will trigger her into retaliating. Hard.
Disrespecting her Colombian heritage and traditions. Jay just loves to poke fun at this, but Gloria will get payback for it.
Sexism pisses her into going on a rant against the offender. Unfortunately for Manny, he’s usually, without realizing, is her most frequent target.
As long as you’re not family, never address Jay as Grandpa in front of her.
Beware the Nice Ones: One of the most kind-hearted individuals of the show... and you'd be wise not to anger her.
Brainless Beauty: Subverted by Gloria, who initially comes across as this but is actually smart, spirited, and very sweet.
Buxom Beauty Standard: Gloria having huge breasts is one of the primary reasons she's a Dude Magnet. Phil is constantly getting distracted by her cleavage and Claire is implied to be envious of her size in one episode.
Cloudcuckoolander: She's a brash, erratic and immature free-spirit and serves as Jay's Manic Pixie Dream Girl with her hyperactive and bubbliness contrasting his no-nonsense and snarky personality.
Cute, but Cacophonic: Gorgeous as she is, Gloria cannot carry a tune and a neighbor mistook her shouting for a parrot's. Once she set off a car alarm with her voice.
Deadpan Snarker: She has her moments.
Gloria: In my culture, it is considered very important that men do their own labor.
Jay: I know. That's why I hire people from your culture.
Gloria: You're too funny! I'm going to tell that one to my next husband while we're spending all of your money.
Drama Queen: She has a dramatic and bombastic personality who's prone to Comical Overreacting.
Eloquent in My Native Tongue: She's actually very (intentionally) funny in Spanish, as well as being intelligent and well-informed, and is regarded as an excellent conversationalist by other characters who speak the language. If she comes across a bit ditzy sometimes it's purely down to the fact that she's the only member of the family speaking a second language, something that she's painfully aware of at times.
Gloria: [to Jay] Do you even know how smart I am in Spanish?
Erotic Eating: She is at one point shown suggestively stuffing marshmallows into her mouth while getting turned on by Jay doing manly construction work.
Expansion Pack Past: At various points in her life she has been: a model, cab driver, hair dresser, mover, philosophy professor and realtor.
Funny Foreigner: Lots of jokes about her accent, tendency towards loudness, the crime and poverty in her hometown, etc.
Gangsta Style: Occasionally carries like this when she thinks she needs to - she is capable of shooting a (BB) gun with alarming accuracy, and tends to make mafia-style threats when somebody has wronged someone in her family or when she wants something done.
Girly Girl with a Tomboy Streak: She's way girlier than Claire, but she likes guns and knows how to use one better than Claire does.
Gold Digger:
Subverted with Gloria but who is actually a very nice person who genuinely loves Jay. She is assumed to be this occasionally, but in reality she is with Jay because she loves him, not for his money.
She says in the Valentine's Day episode that she loves him because he's sexy, and is shown eating marshmallows suggestively as she watches him be all manly and assertive and work with his hands.
Gloria: And the drilling. [stares offscreen] So much drilling.
Hair-Trigger Temper: She can be quite a hothead at times.
Happily Married: To Jay; Gloria loves her husband, Jay, although the two can occasionally bicker over the life of their son, Manny.
Hidden Depths: Is a damn good chess player, possibly even better than Manny.
Hot-Blooded: This Drama Queen is often characterized by her loud, outspoken attitude.
I Just Want to Be Beautiful: It's not her primary motivation, but she certainly takes a lot of pride in her appearance. A good chunk of the situations where she's in the wrong (like refusing to wear glasses or deliberately making Jay late for his birthday party) are motivated by her desire to be the most beautiful person in the room, and she's greatly distressed by the idea of aging when it comes up.
Improbable Aiming Skills: Gloria's a crack shot with a pistol.
Manny: Hey! You could have hit me!
Gloria: Oh please. At this distance, I could have unbuttoned your shirt if I wanted to!
She confirms this in The Stinger of "The Day Alex Left For College", the second episode of the seventh season. During the episode, an apparently wayward shot from an air pistol she was waving around hit Jay in the foot, sparing him from attending Lilly's soccer game. The other characters wondered if she had done that on purpose. In her Confession Cam segment, she confirms it, shooting a sippy cup off a table from behind her back while walking away, without even looking.
Informed Attractiveness: Frequent references are made to her being a bombshell.
Innocently Insensitive: When Mitchell and Cam name her and Jay as Lily's new guardians - should something horrible happen to them - Gloria gets so excited by the prospect that she gleefully picks up "Liliana" and squeals that when something horrible happens to them, Lily is going to be all hers.
It's All About Me: She is incessantly trying to make herself extremely noticeable in a crowd when it comes to her appearance, and is extraordinarily ferocious when other women get more attention than her - this is why she dismisses all of the young, attractive female babysitters from her house so they don't outrank her. Also, when her mother shows the slightest amount of attention to Claire than she does to Gloria, Gloria is provoked into a campaign against Claire, constantly trying to put Claire in the corner. Also, when her mother admits that she does not have a favorite between Gloria and Claire, Gloria roars "Why the Hell not!", indicating that she has always tried to be a favorite.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Downplayed. She has a tendency to be hot blooded, rash, and selfish. However, Gloria is deeply committed to her family and is generally a sweet person.
Large Ham: She is shown to be very expressive in her speech; often imitating the sounds of things when she does not know what to call it, exaggerating her facial expressions and gestures, and shouting loudly when she is upset.
Love at First Punch: Downplayed. Manny mentions to Jay that Gloria fell in love with Jay when they had their first argument.
Lust Object: For Phil. While he loves and would never cheat on Claire, he has a big crush on Gloria and is constantly shown to get attracted or distracted by her sexiness, to the point this becomes a Running Gag.
Mama Bear:
To Manny. She can be shown to stand up to anyone who insults or hurts Manny going on long-winded rants about it.
To the other kids as well, given that through marriage she's the matriarch of the family, she's incredibly protective of them, like the time she threatened Haley's cruel boss with calling in some favors with some of her dangerous friends if didn't ease up on her.
May–December Romance: She's married to Jay, a man 30 years her senior.
Ms. Fanservice: She’s an extremely curvy woman, wears many fashionable and low-cut outfits, and is considered very beautiful by almost every person she talks with.
NO INDOOR VOICE: She basically shouts a lullaby at Lily in one episode.
Parental Substitute: Acts as a motherly figure to Lily. She is also this to Claire and Mitchell much more than the woman who raised them.
Rags to Riches: While she's currently well off due to Jay's money, she was previously destitute and living in a crime-ridden town, and the skills she developed from that period frequently come up. At one point, she starts to have an identity crisis as she realized how privileged she's becoming.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: The Hot-Blooded, easily riled Energetic Girl to Jay's quiet, cool tempered Savvy Guy. Doubles as Red Oni, Blue Oni.
Second Love: To Jay, since he divorced his previous wife.
Single Woman Seeks Good Man: In the form of Jay. While he may have his flaws, he's also dependable, honest, and loves Gloria for more than just her looks.
Smarter Than You Look: While she initially comes across as a vain and privileged Funny Foreigner, it soon becomes clear she's got a lot of Street Smarts and understands people extremely well.
Spicy Latina: Naturally, as she's a Hot-Blooded and quick-tempered Latina woman, and she attributes these traits to her Colombian heritage.
Stacy's Mom: "Send Out the Clowns" made it official for Gloria, as Manny's new "friend" was only interested in her.
Street Smart: Unmoved by things like violence and gore, she can confidently get herself out of trouble and knows plenty of criminal skills like lockpicking and con-artistry. Growing up in Latin America is largely depicted as the reason why.
Tomboy and Girly Girl: The Girly Girl to Claire's Tomboy, though Gloria occasionally shows signs of being a closeted tomboy.
Trophy Wife: Unlike the typical example however, she and Jay really do love each other. When she finds out that Jay is dragging her to a weekend with all his old friends to specifically show her off, she goes from furious to determined to get there.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: To be fair, Jay is in his 60's... but there's no denying Gloria is smokin' hot.
The Un-Favorite: To her father, Fulgencio. It is revealed in "A Tale of Three Cities" that Gloria had issues with her father who loved her sister Sonia more than her. This led to a competition and a tension between the two sisters for years. It even included Gloria taking a letter from Sonia that was for her asking for a job in America. Sonia then realizes the jealousy and the two sisters apparently make up.
Violently Protective Girlfriend: A wife variant. Case in point, she punched a guy in the face when he made an insult against Jay.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Gloria is terrified of the, how do you say in English, the takatakatakataka (translation: She REALLY, SERIOUSLY hates helicopters). She can never seem to remember the English word for it, even though the Spanish word is almost identical.
Women Drivers: Gloria is a terrible driver, although her hot temper means people tend not to bring it up unless they have to.
Cam: I thought she said the car was stationary?
Manny: Yeah, every car seems stationary when you're going 100 miles per hour.