Amicable Exes: He and his ex-wife DeDe get along just fine. They were happily married for 35 years and even after their divorce, they remain on very friendly terms and are very comfortable together, them even dancing together at a wedding.
Brutal Honesty: Jay is honest to a fault.
Cool Old Guy: In his later years, but still incredibly sharp, witty, and charming.
Character Development: He grows more comfortable around Manny, Cam, and Phil as the series goes along.
Deadpan Snarker: Almost on the same level as Ed O'Neil's other prominent character, Al Bundy, except Jay isn't as sarcastic as Al was, probably because he's not married to someone as irritating as Peg Bundy, plus the fact that Jay is much more successful in life than Al was.
Determinator: And not always to his benefit. Jay has a stubborn streak a mile long, and will put himself through almost any degree of pain, misery or loss before acknowledging he might be wrong.
Good Stepfather: He is very much this to Manny. Even if his snark contrasts to Manny's Adorably Precocious Child tendencies, he loves Manny dearly regardless of the fact that Manny isn't his biological son.
Grumpy Old Man: He's a very snarky, cynical, and stubborn old curmudgeon who's played by Ed O'Neill, actor of another famous TV curmudgeon.
Happily Married: Despite the obvious assumption that Gloria is just a trophy wife, he loves her deeply, and considers her son from her previous marriage to be his son as well.
Heroes Love Dogs: Jay loves dogs. He keeps a butler dog mannequin in his home and thinks it's hilarious. And he basically dotes on Stella.
Hidden Depths:
At first he seems like your stereotypical good ol' boy - loves football and lots of macho. But over the seasons, it's revealed he's more of a pragmatic intellectual and shows interests in astronomy, history, model building, and foreign culture among other things. Though the latter one should be self-evident given who he's married to.
Also, while it may seem that he is with Gloria for her looks, it is very quickly revealed that while he's attracted to her physically, it is most definitely her personality that he is interested in.
His relationship with Cam is equally deep - he seems pretty comfortable confiding things he literally will not tell anyone else with Cam.
He absolutely dotes on his little French Bulldog Stella, not the kind of dog you would immediately associate with a man's-man like him. He even takes an interest in dog shows.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Jay is an insensitive jerk, but he always means well and will do what's right in the end.
Like Parent, Like Spouse: Jay turns out to have an eerie resemblance to his father-in-law and is noted to be similar to him in personality.
May–December Romance: Jay, who's in his 60's, and Gloria, who's in her 30's. Gloria gets vey upset when she hits her 40s and people correctly assume that Jay's her husband.
Momma's Boy: It appears Jay was very affectionate with his mother. He had written her a poem for Mother's Day one time as a boy and one time when Jay had a Little League Coach during a football game and was laying on to him about something, she came charging out of the stands and went up to the guy face-to-face and nose-to-nose and told him "Nobody and I mean nobody yells at my little boy" which caused Jay to start crying when he told this story to his family.
Noble Bigot: His homophobia has only slightly decreased with time, but he throws a lavish wedding for Cam and Mitch, whom he calls, in his toast, his sons. And, of course, as soon as he meets their adoptive daughter, who is crying, he fusses over her - and she instantly stops crying apparently able to tell he's a good person.
Obnoxious In-Laws: He constantly gives Phil a hard time for not being "manly" enough, but Phil just turns the cheek (which in turn makes Jay even angrier).
Phil: He gives me a hard time, but that's the deal with a father-in-law. The key is, I never let him see just how much it devastates me.
Older Than They Look: Downplayed, but in Season Five's "A Fair to Remember", it is commented that he looks closer to later-fifties than mid-sixties.
Only Sane Man: In his immediate and very Colombian family. Also occasionally his extended family.
Papa Wolf: If you hurt his kids or grandkids, Jay won't hesitate to pay you back.
Parental Substitute: For Manny, given how flaky and unsavory Manny's real father is. Sees more development in season 6 where he outright calls Manny 'his kid' and 'his son' to other people; for those who haven't seen him in a while, they assume they mean Mitchell.
Parents as People: Jay loves Claire and Mitchell, but it's well established that his relationship with them was often strained when the two of them were younger. On Claire's end, it was because she was a teen rebel, even if she was closer to him overall. With Mitchell, it was because he was still in the closet and, Jay being Jay, he tried to raise Mitchell to be a traditionally masculine boy. Jay himself realizes that he made mistakes raising them, and tries hard to do better with Manny and Joe.
Politically Incorrect Hero: He generally means well and lacks malice, but he's an old-fashioned kind of guy and so there are plenty of gaps in his knowledge of modern political awareness. He loves Mitchell but just can't quite get his head wrapped fully around the "gay" thing, and while he's devoted to Gloria he can sometimes be a bit thoughtless with regards to her culture and language issues.
Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl: The quiet, cool tempered Savvy Guy to Gloria's Hot-Blooded, easily riled Energetic Girl.
Second Love: To Gloria, given she divorced her Manchild ex-husband.
Serious Business: He takes closets and the design, building and sale of them very seriously.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The Manly Man to Phil's Sensitive Guy. Amusingly at times, the relationship between Jay and Gloria veers into Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy.
Jay: [to Manny] She isn't sensitive like you and me. She wouldn't get it!
Straight Man: While he can be stubborn, insensitive and rigid, he plays this role when relating his extended family members. He's especially this type of comedic person whenever he interacts with his energetic and passionate Drama Queen of a wife.
Sugar-and-Ice Personality: Deadpan, prefers not to handle emotional stuff, and stoic. But he has a genuine love for his family and dogs are his biggest weakness.
The Vietnam Vet: His service during the war is alluded to, from time to time. Jay himself considers having to do DIY activities with Mitchell as a more traumatizing experience.
Took a Level in Kindness: Becomes nicer and sensitive over time, especially in regards to Phil, Cam, and Manny.
Troubled Sympathetic Bigot: Especially in the first few seasons, the conflict between his homophobic "good old boy" worldview and his genuine love for his gay son is a major source of drama. He gets better over the course of the show.
The Un-Favorite: To his father. Growing up, Jay did not receive as much emotional support from him as he would have liked which may have been a contributing factor on to why Jay is a cold person often.
In the Season 2 episode "The Kiss" where he was mentioned to have kissed Jay goodnight and his dad said "Goodnight, Becky".
In the Season 7 episode "Clean Out Your Junk Drawer", Jay was mentioned to have not cried at his father's funeral when he was expected to.
In the penultimate Season 9 episode "The Escape", Jay said his father had a fishing cabin he promised would go to Jay, but instead gave to Jay's sister Becky, with Jay even calling his dad a double-crossing bastard.
Jay talks about how he was stood up at the homecoming dance and his father made him a sandwich and told him to just forget about her
When Jay is trying to get Manny to face his fears, he tells a story about how he was terrified to swim in the lake and his dad threw him in.
When complaining about how Jay stole her thunder at a company meeting with a presentation of a biographical promo film about himself, Claire nevertheless acknowledges that a scene where Jay portrayed his father refusing to grant him a start-up loan turned out to be "surprisingly powerful".
Uptight Loves Wild: Jay is a close-minded, serious, and often stoic man. He ended up marrying the very Hot-Blooded and emotional Gloria.
Ugly Guy, Hot Wife: Jay's an average-looking guy in his 60's, while Gloria is a bombshell who's younger than his daughter. This is constantly lampshaded, and many of the other characters (particularly Claire) assume she is a Gold Digger due to this, at least until they get to know her better.
Uptown Guy: He and Gloria, which is deconstructed at some points. It's revealed at different times that while Jay was reasonably well off financially, Gloria struggled with making ends while raising Manny. After they married, many (including Claire, initially) presumed that the reason Gloria married Jay was because of his money. Which is not true. But, the idea caused others to talk behind her back which led to their kids to pick on Manny, both issues that Gloria is well aware of.