Ambiguously Bi: He seems really into Alex's chef boyfriend, and in one episode, he agrees to "hang out and see where it goes" with a man without really putting up a fight.
Attention Deficit... Ooh, Shiny!: He repeatedly becomes distracted when he has to do something important.
Big Brother Instinct: He's Alex's younger brother, but in one episode he decides to stay with her after she has a bad break up instead of going to a party.
Big Little Brother: In the later seasons, he becomes significantly taller than Haley and Alex.
Character Development: While still a bit ditzy, he's gained a more prominent mischievous streak now that he's in middle school.
CloudcuckooLander: He is thought to be a bit vacuous, because of many questionable actions, such as getting his head stuck in the banister and jumping on the trampoline wearing only underwear and a box on his head, and claiming to be ready to leave the house, while having failed to notice that he is barefoot.
Deadpan Snarker: Has progressively become snarkier over the course of the show.
The Ditz: He is known for being a boy with low intelligence, which has supposedly inherited from his father, who is not so many smart either. This makes him to be very innocent and not always understand the repercussions of his actions. It's assumed this is caused by undiagnosed ADHD. Several episodes make jokes about Luke being dropped on the head as a baby and once it's all but confirmed he was struck by lightning at one point, raising serious question if Luke has brain damage.
Dumbass Teenage Son: He's known for being a doofus.
Fat and Skinny: The Skinny to Manny's Fat. Luke is thin in comparison to Manny but is not necessarily a thin person. He is even slightly chubby when he is younger in the earlier seasons, and as he grows older he is quite muscular.
Genius Ditz: Luke occasionally shows signs of this. He's also proven to be a magician prodigy in the making. Probably a mild case of Actor Allusion since Nolan Gould is a member of Mensa, skipped 6 grades, and graduated from high school at the age of 13.
Hidden Depths: Luke has a great singing voice and he's actually a magician prodigy, being able to succeed in what Phil describes as the most difficult escapology trick. He's also shown to be able to master the banjo after a couple of tries and has some impressive gymnastic abilities on a trampoline.
In-Series Nickname: Phil calls him "Buddy" almost 99% of the time.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: For some reason, Luke can be rude and insulting towards Lily but shows his heart of gold a lot towards his mother. In "Integrity" Luke lets Manny think a girl Manny likes isn't paying attention to him because Luke flirted with her, when in reality it's because she flirted with Luke because she likes him, not Manny. Luke lets Manny continue thinking this to spare his friends feeling, even though it means Manny stops talking to him.
Kids Prefer Boxes: One time, his parents actually just got him a box... only for him to play with the bag that it came with instead.
Like Father, Like Son: Luke is just as ditzy as Phil.
Manipulative Bastard: It's startling how easily Luke can get under people's skin when he is properly motivated to do so.
Momma's Boy: He's the sibling who's closest to his mother, with Hayley tending to butt heads and Alex tending to drift into her own world. It's implied a few times that this is because, as a boy, Claire can't see herself in him.
Quirky Curls: They're pretty uncontrollable, even when he gets his hair cut as he grows old.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The Manly Man to Manny's Sensitive Guy.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Towards Lily. Luke competes with Lily over the position of the cute one in their extended family.
Took a Level in Jerkass: In later seasons, as he grows into what Manny describes as "hipster cynicism".
Vocal Evolution: Should be expected as the seasons elapse considering he's growing into a teenager. It's even more prominent when his voice gets even deeper at the end of the show's run.