Badass Bookworm: Mitchell is a lawyer and has used it to get a boy to confess for taking credit from Manny's work.
The Comically Serious: Mitchell quite often, as his serious, uptight personality is contrasted by Cam's more free-spirited, dramatic tendencies.
Daddy Issues: A recurring conflict between Jay and Mitchell is that Jay was never one to be openly affectionate during Mitchell's childhood, which made Mitchell's coming-out particularly uncomfortable. Ironically, a lot of the issues came about because Mitchell was so concerned about Jay's reaction and thus was/is very defensive about his sexuality - various episodes have shown that while Jay might not have been immediately comfortable, he certainly would not have done anything more drastic than snark and squirm a little.
Deadpan Snarker: Has a dry (sometimes mean) sense of humor.
Everyone Has Standards: Pretty much everyone in his family considers him to be something of a control freak, but even he thinks Claire is too hard on her kids (ironically, Claire sees him as the more controlling one).
Fanboy: Mitchell is a major one for Spider-Man, even dressing up as the fictional hero during one Halloween.
Fat and Skinny: A couple example. The Skinny to Cam's Fat.
The Finicky One: Mitchell's an uptight and fussy Nervous Wreck who needs Cameron to calm him down.
Genre Refugee: Him and Cam become this trope briefly in "Baby On Boards". They're characters from an American Sitcom but briefly step into a Telenovela full of attractive people and dramatic plot twists, such as one man faking his death while secretly looking out for a woman's family. Ironically, Mitchell was very critical and dismissive of this type of show earlier, and shows the most confusion about the situation he has found himself in.
Happily Married: Initially Averted, in that while he and Cam were as happy as the other two couples on the show they couldn't legally marry. Played Straight as of the Season 5 finale.
Hates Being Touched: Between his germaphobia and uptightness, he's rarely physically affectionate, much to Cam's annoyance.
Hates Small Talk: While Mitchell's skilled at snarking and at debate, he tends to flounder when it comes to more casual conversation.
Hello, Attorney!: An environmental lawyer who is often noted to be quite handsome.
House Husband: Tries being one for a few episodes after quitting his original job to spend more time with Lily, during which time Cam goes back to work. Subverted in that it turns out they both hate this arrangement, and he gets a new job very quickly.
The Klutz: On occasion, namely with DIY construction and once accidentally breaking a window with nunchucks. Jay regards doing DIY activities with Mitchell as a kid to be a more psychologically damaging experience than serving in Vietnam.
Leg Focus: Invoked in Starry Night, wherein Mitchell gets sprayed by a skunk while on an outing with Jay and Manny. The only thing available for him to change into is a dress Gloria bought and left in Jay's car, which prompts Jay to compliment his son's legs and say he'd do okay as a cross-dresser if he were "that type of gay".
Masculine–Feminine Gay Couple: Depends. Mitch is the Masculine because he's more Straight Gay and is the "stricter" father. However, he could be the Feminine due to him not being not as skilled in "manly things" like Cam is.
Masculine Girl, Feminine Boy: With Claire when they were growing up; since she was a bit of a tomboy growing up while Mitchell was fairly effeminate.
Momma's Boy: Tends to get along marginally better with his mom.
Neat Freak: Exploited. Cam sometimes leaves the house a mess (not cleaning it up), and knows that Mitchell will feel like he needs to clean it and will do so.
Nervous Wreck: Mitchell is a very neurotic and high-strung person who has his obsessive moments much like his sister.
Papa Wolf: Not to the extent of his husband, but Mitch once took on a bird because it was keeping him from giving Lily her milk.
Stepford Snarker: Mitchell often uses his witty sarcasm to hide some of his problems.
Straight Gay: Unlike Cameron, he's got very few camp mannerisms and is normally serious and understated in his speech.
The Un-Favorite: To his father Jay, who found it far easier to related to the tomboyish Claire than the effeminate Mitchell.
Uptight Loves Wild: He's a neurotic, Neat Freak, who hates being touched. And he's the partner and later husband of a flamboyant, extremely emotional Drama Queen.
Waistcoat of Style: As befiting the urbane, sensible and slightly pompous half of the Pritchett-Tucker family.
"Well Done, Son" Guy: In some episodes with Mitchell wanting to earn his father's admiration and approval.
Why Did It Have to Be Snakes?: Birds scare Mitchell to the point that he has to use a baseball bat to get them away from him. Thanks to a friend's cockatoo, he gets over it.