Abusive Parents: While we haven't heard anything about his mom, in season 2 Darryl says his dad yelled at him a lot and called him an "emasculated sock puppet". Which he repressed for years.
Age-Gap Romance: With White Josh. Darryl is somewhere in his forties and White Josh is 26.
Amicable Exes:
While he was initially on fairly bad terms with his ex-wife, Rebecca eventually succeeds in making them reconcile with each other.
Although he and White Josh are initially awkward around each other when they first break up, they soon realize that both of them want to stay friends. Darryl even pushes White Josh to go on dates with other guys.
Attention Whore: He desperately wants to be noticed and included.
Benevolent Boss:
Although he can be a bit of a Bunny-Ears Lawyer, he is still a good boss to his employees, giving them "Weekend Tuesdays" and such.
Comically played with in his treatment of Maya, the new administrative assistant. In the staff meeting which he's called to announce that he's bisexual, he interrupts her attempt to introduce herself with "Maya, this is not the time! This is not about you, okay?". He later gets over his hatred of her in season 2, when he admits that he sees her as the embodiment of everything he hates about himself, finally making him a completely benevolent boss.
Beta Couple: He and White Josh are relatively stable, with the drama in their relationship being realistic and resolved through good communication. It's a point of contrast against Rebecca's extremely turbulent personal life. They break up in season three, however.
Bigger Is Better in Bed: Rebecca asks him if he's good in bed at the end of "I See You," and he informs her that his penis is huge.
Bumbling Dad: Subverted. Despite being a bumbler most of the time, he's actually a much better parent than his ex-wife and is extremely attentive and affectionate towards his daughter.
Bunny-Ears Lawyer: An odd case. While he actually is a lawyer, and is very eccentric, there's no indication that these two qualities intersect at all. We don't get to see much actual legal work being done at the office, but when we do, we see him acting reasonably professional while Rebecca, who is much more concerned with her personal problems than her work, is the one making a scene.
Camp: He's extremely sensitive and dramatic. Some of his employees assumed he was a closeted gay man before he came out as bisexual.
Celebrity Resemblance: According to White Josh, he looks like Tom Selleck.
Coming-Out Story: He has one in the second half of the first season.
Cultural Personality Makeover: Darryl discovered he had a Chippewa great-grandparent and promptly changed his surname to "Whitefeather", bought a bunch of Native American-inspired decor from a flea market, and asked his employees to call him "Chief".
Endearingly Dorky: Darryl is overly enthusiastic and eager to please and wears his heart on his sleeve. This adorkability is what attracts White Josh to him in the first place.
Darryl: "That was funny (Whijo kissing him) is that a European thing or was it something Hector put you up to?"
White Josh: "No dude, I'm gay. You were being really cute so..."
Fire-Forged Friends: Eventually, with Maya the administrative assistant.
Foil:
To every parent in the show. He is the sole Good Parent in the plot, and it shows, as Madison is shown to be intelligent and well-adjusted (if a little snarky) and is sometimes more down to earth and sane than her father. Even being the one that plots an encounter between him and White Josh that forces them to talk about his problems and break up.
He is also a major foil to Rebecca. They're both desperate for affection but Darryl doesn't lie and break the law like Rebecca does and when he gets into a relationship, it's one full of trust and honesty.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Desperately wants to be acknowledged by Rebecca and Paula as a close friend, and while they mostly seem to like him, they're also generally indifferent to his presence. This poor treatment is reflected in his treatment of Maya, who he admits to seeing a lot of himself in. They become genuine friends eventually.
Good Parents: He's an incredibly loving father who bursts into tears at the thought of losing custody of his daughter, and later dotes over his baby daughter Hebecca.
Has a Type: Inverted. He's proud of not having a type ("I don't even have a gender!"), and is actively hurt when his boyfriend turns out to have one which he fits, since he feels it makes their relationship less special.
The Heart: Possibly the sweetest person on the show. When Rebecca tells him off at the intervention in season 3, even Nathaniel is shocked.
I Just Want to Have Friends: Darryl has been rather lonely since his divorce. He's willing to do pretty much anything for the chance to have friends.
Important Haircut: He shaves his mustache by the end of "I See You," and Rebecca even lampshades how crucial it was for his image.
Late Coming Out: Darryl is middle-aged, and didn't realize he was bi until he falls for White Josh. He doesn't angst about it though and even announces it to his employees with a song number.
Meet Cute: When he first meets White Josh, the first thing Whi Jo does is take his shirt off and welcome him.
My Biological Clock Is Ticking: Manages to act out this trope practically to the letter despite being 1) male, 2) middle-aged, 3) already a parent. Once he gets the idea into his head of having another child, he gets so excited about it that he can't stand to wait another second, causing him to act very much like a woman who feels like time is running out - even breaking up with his boyfriend when it turns out he doesn't want kids and opting for single parenthood instead.
Nice Guy:
Boundlessly optimistic and nice. (Except to Maya, the administrative assistant, in her first few appearances. And even then he ends up admitting to her that he's being a dick to her because she reminds him of everything he doesn't like about himself. After that they become strong friends.)
Exaggerated in "I See You", in that Darryl constantly wanting to talk to Rebecca about her feelings drives her completely up the wall.
No Bisexuals: Discussed and defied in his solo number "Getting Bi", where he acknowledges the common belief that all bisexual men are simply gay and in denial about it, only to firmly reject it as being untrue.
One-Drop Rule: He clearly believes in (a positive version of) this, being very proud of being one-eighth Chippewa even though he clearly has no connections to the culture and all his American-Indian decorations are gaudy junk he got from a flea market. Season 3 reveals that his last name wasn't even originally "Whitefeather," but that he had it legally changed when finding out about his Chippewa great-grandparent.
Papa Wolf: When he hears about Rebecca's suicide attempt in season 3 he threatens to kill Josh. And when he gets a call from White Josh, who is babysitting his daughter Hebecca, in season 4, he goes from ranting about his bad night to screaming "What's wrong with my daughter?"
Parental Incest: Subverted but played for laughs. He deeply loves his daughter and isn't shy about saying it, but is very prone to moments of That Came Out Wrong that cause him to sound as if he is attracted to her.
Parental Substitute: He takes Nathaniel under his wing pretty soon after his arrival at the firm, and is one of the only people who can make him relax.
Plucky Comic Relief: While Darryl has his own problems, and the rest of the cast are all funny in their own ways, his conflicts tend to be resolved fairly easily, and he is otherwise around mostly as a source of humor.
Pointy-Haired Boss: He runs the office... interestingly. He once called a meeting just to announce to his staff that he was bisexual. He started an event called Weekend Tuesdays where everyone puts on fun hats and drinks on a Tuesday, although he doesn't seem to have thought the endeavor through:
Bill: Um, since it's Weekend Tuesday, um, can we just go home?
Darryl: See, it's Weekend Tuesday, but it's not the real weekend. Now, look, Bill, why don't you put on that sombrero and then head on back to work?
Bill: ...Right.
Sensitive Guy and Manly Man: The Sensitive Guy to White Josh's Manly Man.
Sweet Tooth: Repeatedly shown to love candy, and has a complete meltdown when Nathaniel bans sweets from the office.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: Rebecca calling a hit on Mona was indirectly caused by him allowing her to take hormones to get her eggs. Although, in his defense, Rebecca was the one to never ask for his doctor's advice and take hormones either way, knowing the effects it could cause.