Advertised Extra: In season 1, at least. While she is treated as a main cast member by the opening credits, she doesn't appear until the third episode of the series, has no major ties to the plot besides briefly dating Greg, frequently is absent from episodes entirely and in general only contributes about as much as supporting characters such as White Josh do. This is lessened in season 2, where she becomes Rebecca's roommate, though she is still generally much less of a presence than the rest of the main cast. She's since become more prominent in the cast and has a big part in Darryl's subplot in season 3.
Ambiguously Bi: Heather has dated guys, but she has also remarked that she finds Rebecca dressed in a lawyer outfit hot.
Heather: Man, she looks hot in her little legal outfit, right? I'd pound that gavel.
Ambiguously Brown: Heather is biracial (with a white mom and a black dad), but she's seen as this in-universe, if Kevin trying to eke her ethnicity out of her in "Oh, Nathaniel, It's On!" is any indication. He guesses she's of Indian descent.
Brilliant, but Lazy: She doesn't really has the drive to do anything, despite her genuine skill and smarts at doing it, she'd much rather not do anything at all.
Brutal Honesty: Has no problem delivering crushing truths to Rebecca about her behavior.
Character Development: She seems at first to be a stereotypical slacker student, but in Season 2's "When Will Josh and his Friend Leave Me Alone?" it emerges that she still lives with her parents, who adore her and encourage her no matter what. When Heather inadvertently becomes the face of "Miss Douche", she realizes that her parents "reward failure", and she resolves to get her own place with Rebecca as her roommate.
The Comically Serious: In her musical numbers. Notably in "The Moment Is Me", an hopeful song which she sings with no enthusiasm whatsoever.
The Cynic: She's pretty uninterested in everything around her.
Deadpan Snarker: Sarcasm is her go-to response to almost everything.
The Ditherer: This is implied to be the reason for her refusing to graduate despite having been in college for eight years and having taken all her university's courses — she is unsure of what to do with her life and has been sitting on this decision for a while.
Doting Parent: Her parents are extremely loving and encouraging of everything she does which is part of why Heather has become so shiftless. Despite this, she still loves them and whatever their flaws, their approach to parenting is shown as undeniably preferable to how Rebecca's mother treated her as Heather is able to grow anyway and settle into a nice independent life without too much issue.
Emotionless Girl: She barely displays any emotion at all. Even on a sugar rush.
Heather: [absolutely deadpan]] I like you a lot, Greg.
Greg: [smiling] That's—that's funny.
Heather: [still absolutely deadpan] Yeah, no, I'm, like, excited about this. I have butterflies.
Fatal Flaw: She avoids actual responsibilities like the plague. In no small part due to her parents "rewarding failure", she learned she never needed to take anything to the end and avoids things when they get too hard. She grows out of it in season 3, adopting responsibilities as a manager in Home Base.
Foil: She's Rebecca's polar opposite. While Rebecca is extremely accomplished, energetic and has spent years in a professional role, Heather has spent years performing well below her capabilities, is extremely laid-back and unemotional and has been putting off adult responsibilities for as long as she can. They also have radically different parents which show the difference between being giving too much praise and not enough to kids: While Rebecca's mother treated her horribly and her father is a selfish bastard who had no interest in being in her life, resulting in Rebecca having severe emotional problems she spends the series dealing with with mixed results, Heather's parents supported everything she did and never really pushed her to become independent or aspire for more. Though it's worth noting that while Rebecca's parents left her seriously damaged and barely functional at the start of the show, Heather is simply immature and shiftless but is eventually able to settle in to a good career that she enjoys and have a perfectly happy marriage to Hector without much issue and is overall much more well-adjusted than Rebecca.
Friendless Background: Just like Rebecca and Valencia, she never had any female friends beforehand. Only that her case wasn't because of hidden insecurities, but because most girls communicate indirectly and Heather is unapologetically direct.
Happily Married: She and Hector get married in Season 4, on a whim, during her lunch break, so she could add him to her health insurance plan. Despite this total lack of planning, their marriage appears to be rock solid.
Hidden Depths: Heather is actually very observant and sensitive to the feelings of others.
Insistent Terminology: Does not like being called "Heath" and invariably corrects people when they do.
Irony: Her advice towards Greg that he should express his feelings after he learns that Josh has been sleeping with Rebecca (his ex) may come as this, given how aloof and stoic she's most of the times.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Downplayed. Heather's sarcastic, blunt, and lazy but is otherwise a pretty nice person.
Not So Stoic:
Heather breaks down and almost cries when she confronts Greg about rushing off to LA to admit his feelings to Rebecca. She's also visibly panicked when Rebecca nearly throws herself off a cliff at the end of season two.
When heavily pregnant and emotional about it in season three, Heather actually breaks down and cries openly. Hector is as stunned as the audience. She also cries tears of joy at her wedding to Hector in season four.
Out of Focus: She doesn't get written out so much as just not having much to do with the plot in the latter half of the first season. However, she comes back into focus in Season 2, with she and Rebecca becoming roommates.
Pet the Dog: She pretty much selflessly volunteers to bear Darryl's child, without even asking for money or anything. Subverted when she points out that she agreed to it on a whim, and later acknowledged that she did not think through all the implications first, something Hector even calls her out on when she complains too much, leading Heather to actually cry much to Hector's shock.
Shipper on Deck: By the end of the show she's solidly on team Nathaniel/Rebecca.
The Stoic: She rarely shows her emotions outwardly. In "Nathaniel and I Are Just Friends!" she admits she was stoic as a baby — she didn't even cry and her parents thought something was wrong with her.
Heather: I was just a super chill baby!
Triumphant Reprise: Reprises Greg’s ode to self-loathing, “Settle For Me,” as an ode to self-love, “DON’T Settle For Me.”