Alliterative Name: Paula Proctor. The catchiness of her name is lampshaded a couple of times, with her husband noting that it's a great name for a lawyer.
Awful Wedded Life: Zig-zagged. At first, there are numerous problems with Paula and Scott's marriage (apparently, she hasn't had sex without the TV on for ten years). It starts to get better when they go to marriage counseling, and bond over throwing a rock through Rebecca's window. By Season 2's "When Will Josh and his Friend Leave Me Alone?", Paula and Scott's marriage is positively heartwarming. Then in "Who is Josh's Soup Fairy?" he confesses to having had sex with Tanya, and Paula immediately boots him out of the house. They go back to marriage counseling and are back to being Happily Married by the end of "Josh's Ex-Girlfriend Wants Revenge."
Beleaguered Assistant: To Darryl and the other lawyers in the office. Rebecca accidentally mistakes her for her new secretary; Paula has to point out that she's head paralegal, which is very different.
Berserk Button: Infidelity is a very sensitive issue for her. When Scott fesses up to having an impulsive one-night stand with a coworker, she immediately throws him out of the house without a second thought. Even when she finally relents and lets him start trying to win her trust back, she's downright draconian about the hoops he has to jump through.
Big Beautiful Woman: She is somewhat heavyset, and also considered very attractive by several characters.
Character Development: Paula goes from a woman crazy to get any sort of fun and escapism from her marriage to a woman who is a loving wife and mother over time, as she stopped dedicating so much to Rebecca's love life in later seasons. While her initial behavior was pushing Rebecca further over the edge, it's now of the most grounding things Rebecca has in her life.
The Confidant: Becomes the only person in West Covina who Rebecca is willing to confide her most personal feelings with by the end of the first episode.
Crusading Lawyer: Becoming a lawyer was always a dream of hers, and she starts law school in season 3. She also develops an interest in working cases for people who need representation, and catalyzes a new pro bono arm of the high-powered firm she works for in the end.
Deadpan Snarker: One of the main sources of it, particularly towards her co-workers.
The Determinator: Played with. Paula is relentlessly driven when she decides she wants to do something, but that isn't always a good thing. Her dedication to Rebecca's love life is impressive, but also seriously ill-advised. When she decides she wants to be a lawyer, she devotes herself to it with equal fervor, but that often results in her alienating or neglecting the people around her. While studying for the bar exam, she becomes so focused that she tries to power through what turns out to be a heart attack... for 18 hours!
The Dog Bites Back: In "Josh and I are Good People", it's shown she is bullied in the office for being a paralegal rather than a lawyer. When Rebecca and Darryl leave to take care of a case, they let her run the office, and she takes the opportunity to pay back for every time Karen, Tim and Jim pissed her off, including threatening Tim with deportation after finding out he is illegally in America. She backs down thinking about his family, but none of them ever disrespected her again.
Fatal Flaw: A desperate desire to escape her unpleasant reality. She latches onto Rebecca's crazy love story as another hobby to distract her from the crazy and ungrateful life she leads with her family of a neglectful husband and two problem children, which leads her to become an increasingly toxic influence for Rebecca. She eventually drops this, however.
Fiery Redhead: She's a redhead and has a tendency to become extremely fired up when planning ways for Rebecca to become closer to Josh.
Good Parents: As soon as Rebecca reveals to have lost her son in a club, she automatically gets serious while questioning her whether anyone gave him drugs or abused him. After it's confirmed that he just got lost and then came back home on his own, she feels fully relieved, admitting that her son gets lost all the time and she is used to it, but she was afraid of what could have happened to him in a club.
Heel–Face Turn: While never evil, she goes from antagonistic towards Rebecca to her best friend over the course of the first episode.
Hyper-Competent Sidekick: Paula is extremely adept at gathering intel about Josh, as well as formulating strategies to get closer to him on the fly. Played with, in that she frequently does these things expressly against Rebecca's wishes. It later turns out that she's an expert gambler, and graduates top of her class at law school.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: She's rude, pushy, scheming, manipulative, conniving... and she genuinely loves Rebecca with all her heart.
Like a Son to Me: Blurts this out about Rebecca from time to time. Never having had a daughter of her own is a huge motivator for Paula to meddle in Rebecca's life.
The Nicknamer: Paula is this only with regard to Valencia, who at various times she has referred to as "Venezuela", "Valderrama", "Vaseline" and "Velveeta". Also refers to Rebecca occasionally as "Cookie".
Only Sane Employee: Her and Mrs. Hernandez, anyway.
Parents as People: While she dearly loves her children, Paula is quite neglectful and doesn't really enjoy spending time with them, not helped by the fact that her two children are quite awful people and dislike spending time with her too. albeit largely due to Paula's own disinterest. As a result, she often ignores her family beyond the most basic of needs to latch on to her hobbies, which included vampire novels and later, Rebecca's love life.
Parental Substitute: While it's mostly the other way around, she eventually becomes a motherly figure for Rebecca, who even calls her "Mama" at least once.
Psycho Supporter: She'll do anything for Rebecca. Even when Rebecca expressly doesn't want her to do it. If she thinks it'll help Rebecca get closer to Josh, it'll get done.
Secret Chaser: Served as this towards Rebecca throughout the first episode, only for Rebecca to admit her intentions, causing Paula to instantly become her most loyal ally.
She Cleans Up Nicely: She's stunning when she slips into something other than her usual office-wear. Her red dress in "His Status is Preferred" is a particular standout for how sexy Paula can actually be. No wonder Calvin was interested!
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis Subverted. She's set up as this throughout almost all of the first episode, acting highly suspicious of her and snooping in on her personal life. By the end of the episode, she ends up becoming Rebecca's closest friend and confidant, as well as her sole ally in her pursuit of Josh.
Shipper on Deck: Massive shipper for Rebecca and Josh, she'll do anything to get them together.
Talking Down the Suicidal: She has to stop Rebecca from jumping off a cliff after Josh abandons her at the alter.
Toxic Friend Influence: She supports Rebecca's impulsive behavior, even gives her questionable advices to achieve her goals, and she can't see that all these worsen her condition, because she's a massive Rebecca/Josh shipper. By later seasons, this characteristic is toned down.
Undying Loyalty: Becomes even more devoted to getting Josh and Rebecca together than Rebecca herself is in a very short amount of time.
Vicariously Ambitious: She really wants to see Rebecca get together with Josh, in part because of her own romantic failings. In the pilot, she stated that she wished she were as brave as Rebecca, throwing everything away for love, so it's clear that at least part of the reason she is helping Rebecca is to live vicariously through her.
Well-Intentioned Extremist: She wants Rebecca to be happy, but, through a combination of her Wrong Genre Savvy idea about relationships, as well as her desire to vicariously live out her unfulfilled dreams through Rebecca, only succeeds in helping Rebecca's unhealthy fixation with Josh grow.
Wrong Genre Savvy: Like Rebecca, she sees their lives as a grand romance, with herself in the role of the sassy and supportive friend. This becomes a real problem, because she becomes seriously invested in Rebecca getting together with Josh, not only enabling Rebecca's bad behavior, but even pushing her to go to greater extremes. Eventually she realizes that she's trying to live out this story by proxy to escape her dissatisfaction with her own life, and gets better.