Aborted Declaration of Love: Jim was ready to confess his feelings for Pam as early as the Season 2 Christmas episode. After a complicated setback, he pockets the love-letter he'd planned to give Pam and didn't give it to her until the end of Season 9.
The Ace: One of the best salesmen in the company, a Chick Magnet to the point that he's arguably the most handsome man in the office, gets away with every prank he pulls, and gets the girl of his dreams. Jim is likely the most conventionally successful person in the office.
Agent Scully: Doesn’t believe in ghosts to the point where he gets into a full-blown fight with Pam when she says that she does.
All Guys Want Cheerleaders: Averted. Jim dated former cheerleader Katy, but only to distract himself from Pam.
Ambiguously Jewish: Halpert is typically a Jewish surname, and his demeanor could indicate he's a Jewish Smartass, but there otherwise isn't any suggestion that he's Jewish, and the kilt his dad wears to the Jim/Pam wedding points to the family being Scottish (in which case Halpert might just be an alternate spelling of the British name Halbert). Given Dwight's implied Nazi connections, this would add a layer of Mel Brooks-styled comedy to their feud.
Anguished Declaration of Love: The Season 2 finale has Jim giving Pam one, which pains the both of them as they know it can't go anywhere since Pam is still engaged.
Jim: I’m in love with you.
Pam: What?
Jim: I’m really sorry if that’s weird for you to hear, but I needed you to hear it. Probably not good timing, I know that. I just…
Pam: What are you doing? What do you expect me to say to that?
Jim: I just needed you to know. Once.
Pam: Well, I um… I… I can’t.
Jim: Yeah.
Pam: You have no idea…
Jim: Don’t do that.
Pam: …what your friendship means to me.
Jim: Come on. I don’t wanna do that. I wanna be more than that.
Pam: I can’t. I’m really sorry if you misinterpreted things. It’s probably my fault.
Jim: Not your fault. I’m sorry I misinterpreted our friendship.
Audience Surrogate: Jim is the one who most frequently reacts to the insanity around him, mostly by throwing Aside Glances as the camera.
Aw, Look! They Really Do Love Each Other:
He loves messing with Dwight for his own amusement but he ultimately sees Dwight as a friend and will look out for Dwight's best interests. Like when he physically fought Dwight to prevent him from going into a meeting where he'd be scapegoated and fired and putting together the ultimate bachelor party so that Dwight can make peace with Kevin and stepping aside so that Dwight can have Michael as his best man.
Jim doesn't think too highly of Michael, but in spite of that he manages to find the occasional moment where he can praise him. The crowning moment being when he figures out Michael is about to leave forever and Jim lets him know he's been the best boss ever.
After Athlead drove a wedge between him and Pam, Jim agrees to marriage counselling, only to have to go to a meeting that would potentially undo all the counselling they'd been working on. When Pam rushes out to meet him at the taxi, Jim realizes then and there what matters most to him and kisses Pam passionately, brushing off the meeting.
Babies Ever After: By the series finale, he has daughter (Cecelia) and son (Phillip) with Pam.
Batman Gambit: A lot of Jim's pranks on Dwight can only fully work if Dwight reacts a certain way, like using the "gaydar" on himself in "Gay Witch Hunt". But Dwight - since he's Super Gullible and has very specific obsessions and thought patterns - almost always does exactly what Jim expects him to do.
Birds of a Feather: With Pam, both being apathetic about their work, and aware of being more normal and reasonable compared to their quirky coworkers. They are also both considered the most attractive and desirable people in the office, but don't have much social life outside of work and find themselves in relationships that they're not fully committed to.
Break the Haughty: Turns out challenging Dwight to a snowball fight was a very bad idea. Jim spends two episodes nursing a bloody nose and fearing for his safety.
Brilliant, but Lazy:
As noted by Pam in "Office Olympics", when Jim gets excited by something, he really gets into it and does an amazing job. Sadly, he works at Dunder Mifflin Scranton, so that doesn't happen often.
Jim: Right now, this is my job. If I advance any higher, this becomes my career. And if this is my career...I would have to throw myself in front of a train.
When Sabre took away sales caps, he turned down a management position because he could make more money from actually giving attention to his job. Then the trope is re-proven when sales caps are reinstated, and when he finds he hit his he immediately goes in to slacking off again.
Bully Hunter: Downplayed, and more like "Jerk Hunter", but part of what takes some of the potential meanness out of Jim's tendency to prank others is that he usually targets people who are themselves being jerks. For example, several of his more notable pranks against Dwight tend to come after Dwight has been particularly arrogant, obnoxious or high-handed about something.
Butt-Monkey: After getting with Pam, Jim's cool underdog image is push aside and his awkward moments are played upnote . He's forced to confront Karen after getting suckered into a prank that backfired. He makes a fool of himself while trying to discuss "Angela's Ashes" with Pam's "Finer Things Club". His attempts at leadership expose his similarities to Michael and make his co-workers turn against him. He makes a bad first impression on Michael's new boss. He accidentally reveals that Pam got pregnant out of wedlock in front of her conservative grandmother. Then there's the snowball fight...
The Chains of Commanding: His first efforts at managing the Scranton branch are disastrous and he quickly gets a new appreciation for the difficulties of Michael's role as a result.
Character Development: He starts as a Brilliant, but Lazy prankster who takes no risk to a more professionally active and ambitious man Happily Married to the woman he had a hard time to confess his love and became Fire-Forged Friends with his favorite target for pranking.
Chick Magnet: There's Pam, of course, but he also dated Katy, Brenda, and Karen, who even went from "what's up with that guy?" to crushing on him in one episode. There's also Cathy, who unsuccessfully tries to steal him from Pam, and all the other women in the office (sans Angela) admitted that if they had to do it with someone, they would pick Jim.
Consistent Clothing Style: Jim's office attire generally consists of blue/white long sleeved shirts with the sleeves rolled up more often than not and a simple solid black/navy necktie. His choice of attire generally reflects his passion for the job, as he wears much more refined suits when he's feeling ambitious.
Deadpan Snarker: Mostly directed towards Michael and Dwight, especially during conference room meetings.
Deuteragonist: Michael and his various antics are usually the driving force of the show, but Jim's own story, mainly his relationship with Pam, gets the most individual focus out of all the office members. Fittingly, he becomes the de facto protagonist after Michael's retirement at the end of Season 7.
Double Date: Jim and Pam get suckered into double-dating Michael and Jan, then Phyllis and Bob Vance. Both convince the two that they should avoid double-dates with their co-workers, to the annoyance of Erin when she starts dating Pete.
Earn Your Happy Ending: Jim's love confession to Pam doesn't work in his favour at all. It's only after a year of keeping Pam at arm's length before gradually repairing their friendship that Pam reveals she loves him back. Jim is then at a crossroads on whether he should move to New York with his new girlfriend and a cushy job or stay in boring old Scranton with the woman he truly loves. He chooses love.
Enemy Mine: Jim will team up with Dwight whenever an outsider gives their branch any grief.
Even the Guys Want Him: Michael once commented on how good looking Jim is.
The Everyman: An easily relatable average guy.
Everyone Can See It: With Pam. Michael being the exception.
Everyone Has Standards:
As much as he pranks and mocks Dwight, he strongly disapproves of Michael's treatment of him, notably in "Drug Testing" and "Golden Ticket". Probably at least in part because whereas Jim's actions are in response to Dwight's Jerkass behavior towards him, Dwight practically worships the ground Michael walks on (most of the time).
Jim tends to avoid doing anything that involves putting Dwight in serious physical danger, causing him genuine distress, or threatening his job, and is usually among the first to step in if Dwight is in danger of any of those from another source.
"(Dwight climbs a power pole) Oh, he'll be fine. I made it up there."
He looks after Michael in the same vein and in the end, tells him how much he actually appreciates him as his boss.
When Michael finds something foul on the floor in his office, the crew immediately ask Jim if he left it there as a prank. Jim denies it and say that sounds too disgusting to be one of his pranks.
Everyone Knows Morse: Jim and Pam went out of their way to learn Morse Code so they could make fun of Dwight without speaking.
Expository Hairstyle Change: Jim gets a haircut when he applies for the corporate position in New York. In future episodes he would sporadically put more effort into his appearance whenever he's feeling ambitious, with his trademark scruffy look eventually being phased out.
Fire-Forged Friends: He and Dwight go from rivals to friends in the final season, to the point that Dwight makes Jim his Best Man at his wedding.
For Halloween, I Am Going as Myself: Jim puts no effort into his Halloween costumes. Dwight's the only one who doesn't find it amusing. Subverted when Pam convinces him to dress as Popeye to her Olive Oyl.
Four-Temperament Ensemble: Phlegmatic.
The Gadfly: Loves playing pranks, preferably on Dwight. It's partly to keep Dwight's ego in check, partly to alleviate the boredom of the office.
Gaslighting: One of his more frequent methods of messing with Dwight. It helps that Dwight is extremely gullible. His more notable examples include:
Paying everyone in the office to call Dwight "Dwayne" all day.
Moving Dwight's desk an inch every time he stepped away from it.
Telling Dwight that a Ben Franklin impersonator is actually the real thing.
Convincing Dwight that he's selling a packet of magic beans, then swapping the potted seeds with fully grown beanstalks immediately after Dwight plants them.
Asking an actor friend (who happens to be Asian) to go to work in his place and pretend to be him. He goes as far as to give said actor extensive background information on himself, gets Pam to kiss him and even photoshops a family photo to show Asian Jim and Pam with two Asian-looking children.
Gone Horribly Right:
Jim lets Dwight believe that he poisoned the latter shortly before Dwight's appendix suddenly became infected. Dwight ends up being wheeled out of a seminar on a stretcher accusing Jim of trying to kill him, which Jim frantically denies.
When Michael meets Holly, Jim advises him to be patient and let their relationship flow naturally, instead of forcing a Fourth-Date Marriage. Unfortunately, this advice works so well that when Holly tries to send hints to Michael, he doesn't take them.
Groin Attack: Jim says that one of the upsides of riding a bicycle to work is that it's "cheaper than a vasectomy".
Happily Married: With Pam as of early season 6. They go through a couple of rough spots - especially in season 9 - but the marriage survives.
Has a Type: He briefly dated Katy (the handbag saleswoman first seen in "Hot Girl"), who, as a demure, petite woman with long, light-colored hair, was similar enough to Pam to be dubbed "new and improved Pam" by Michael. Averted with his other major love interest, the dark-haired, feisty Karen (though it's implied that after he went to Stamford, he was specifically trying to avoid a relationship with anyone who would remind him of Pam).
Hoist by His Own Petard: There are the rare moments when Dwight is able to turn the tables on Jim. Such as Dwight handily defeating Jim in a snowball fight and turning the guy into a paranoid wreck. Or when Jim tried tempting Dwight with his credit card number and security code, only for Dwight to use the information to send a very expensive bouquet of flowers to Pam, meaning Jim can't use the act to get Dwight in trouble.
Idiot Ball: He picks up the idiot ball when he becomes a co-manager, ultimately culminating with him outing Pam's pregnancy to her overly-traditional grandmother. Whether it's the position itself, or finding that actually trying to manage the cast of characters that make up the office that drives one to idiocy is up for debate.
In-Series Nickname: Andy calls him "Big Tuna" or sometimes just "Tuna" ever since he saw him eat a tuna sandwich for lunch.
I Want My Beloved to Be Happy: When his personal ambitions take their toll on his marriage, Jim finally decides to step back from Athlead and spend more time with Pam.
Jerkass Ball: When Jim's biggest prank on Andy drives the latter into punching a wall and forcing him to undergo anger management, Jim continues to get under his skin completely unprovoked.
Jerkass Realization:
Once Michael starts listing off all of the pranks he's pulled on Dwight over the years, Jim slowly realises that he's been incredibly mean to Dwight and even if Dwight "deserved it", if nothing else the sheer number of pranks he's pulled were excessive and the fact that he could waste entire days doing nothing but screw with Dwight is just sad. More poignant was that Dwight was trying to get Jim fired or at least transferred for all of these pranks and it dawns on Jim that the real reason he's been doing this is because he's become miserable at work and they are what he does to pass the time so Dwight might even be right.
When discussing marriage counseling with Toby, one of Toby's comments makes him realize exactly what he's been putting Pam through by splitting his time in Philly. This is the point where he starts to work on fixing things.
On a more minor level, at several points in Season Five strangers (such as with the nursery manager and the nurse at the hospital) point out how annoying and unpleasent his Deadpan Snarker personality can be. He's clearly shocked and abashed each time.
Jerkass to One: He regularly picks on Dwight, but is rarely mean to other people unless they need to be humbled.
Jerk with a Heart of Gold: Downplayed. Some of his pranks on Dwight are genuinely mean-spirited, but most would agree he's a Nice Guy. When Dwight goes through a depression over Angela dumping him, Jim holds off on the pranks and supports Dwight by staying at his bed-and-breakfast and reassuring him that he knows how it feels to watch someone you love be engaged to another.
Karma Houdini: Most of his pranks should have gotten him reprimanded. More than a few of them should have gotten him fired. And a small handful of them (particularly when he tried to lob a baseball at Dwight) should have ended in his immediate arrest.
Karma Houdini Warranty: After getting away with pranking Dwight for years, he gets a pretty humiliating comeuppance in the snowball fight episode.
The Killjoy: As part of his co-manager arc, Jim of all people is annoyed of Michael's antics during the "Murder" episode because of the company being in big financial trouble while Michael is wrapping people in to play a murder mystery game. When Jim tries to call Michael out for that, Michael yells at him to shut up and tells Jim that their employees need that game. Jim realizes the importance of the gamenote  and encourages the others to continue playing it.
Last-Name Basis: Affectionately refers to Pam as "Beesly", even after they're married. He similarly uses "Filipelli" when he's dating Karen.
Lonely at the Top: When he briefly became co-manager alongside Michael. Even Pam struggles to side with him on some of his decisions.
Mellow Fellow: Jim is laid-back and hardly ever raises his voice. That being said, he can lose his temper when a source of annoyance persists.
Men Don't Cry: Jim cries precisely thrice in the whole series; the first when he's giving Pam a love confession knowing that she'll be marrying someone else. The second are Tears of Joy when he finds out Pam is having twins. And the third is when he figures out Michael's planning to leave a day earlier than he promised, during which he makes sure to tell his boss how much fun he had working for him.
Mirror Character: Whenever Jim gets the chance to be in charge of the office, there are hints that he could turn into Michael if he's not careful.
Jim tries to be a different kind of manager than Michael. But he ends up taking residence in Michael's office, gets annoyed by Toby, initially tries to call an impromptu meeting in the conference room, and finds out that his way of handling a simple task (birthday planning) makes things unnecessarily complicated and troublesome. At one point, Phyllis even accidentally calls him "Michael". It's really hammered home by the end of that episode, when Michael reveals that he actually once tried to do the exact same thing Jim did of organizing multiple birthdays into one big party. Jim remarks that he doesn't see himself at Dundler-Mifflin in 10 years, to which Michael says that's what he said back when he was in Jim's shoes.
After being promoted to co-manager Jim points out that Michael is too timid to communicate unpopular decisions to his staff, which Jim himself learns is easier said than done.
"Is there something about being a manager that makes you say stupid things?"
Mistaken for Gay:
Mentioned by a few characters. It doesn't help that during a game of Who Would You Do, Jim jokingly said Kevin. His disinterest in the women he's dating being another contributor, since at least two of them were incredibly attractive.
In season 3 Roy admits that he only tolerated Jim's friendship with his fiancee because he thought Jim was gay.
Todd Packer asked Jim if he is "still queer", though that's a pretty standard remark for Packer to make towards any guy.
Creed also seemed to think Jim was gay, despite knowing of his relationship with Pam and trying to hook Jim up with his daughter just a few seconds before.
Moving-Away Ending: Jim and Pam move to Texas in the series finale.
My Own Private "I Do": On Maid of the Mist. Apparently, he got the tickets as soon as he saw the YouTube video of the wedding dance routine.
Nice Guy: Pranks on Dwight aside, Jim is probably the most pleasant worker at the office. He is one of the few to appreciate Michael as both a boss and a person, he's Happily Married to Pam, and he even becomes the best of friends with Dwight.
Noob: At Call of Duty. He accidentally kills his own team members, gets stuck in corners and wants to snipe in Carentan.
Not So Above It All: Jim believes he can do Michael's job better than he can. Then he gets promoted to co-manager and finds out that announcing unpopular decisions will cause enough pressure to make him beg for the staff's approval.
In the opening for Season 7, it seems like Jim's unenthusiastic about participating in the "Nobody But Me" tribute video the rest of the staff are doing, until he suddenly starts lip-synching in the most animated way possible.
Oh, Crap!: Due to being the closest embodiment of No Fourth Wall on the show, Jim's tend to be most visible. He gives a particularly spectacular one when Michael successfully tricks him and Pam into having dinner at his place.
Only Known by Their Nickname: Almost nobody ever refers to him by his actual first name, James.
Andy insists on calling Jim "Big Tuna".
Only Sane Man: While Jim is probably the most likely out of the entire Dunder Mifflin staff to point out his coworker's foibles and snark about them, he is more than willing to indulge them for his own amusement whenever he's bored, which is often. In later episodes, though, Jim has shown that he's not immune to picking up the Idiot Ball, especially when he's put in charge of anything, and he and Pam go through a good deal of drama in the final season due to their inability to communicate.
Pet the Dog:
Anytime Jim gets carried away with his mischief, he'll balance it out with something genuinely kind-hearted. A key instance being when he held a house party for his co-workers and deliberately left out Michael, but when Michael crashes the party and embarrasses himself by trying to sing a karaoke duet by himself, Jim sings along with him out of pity.
In "Garage Sale", Jim tricks Dwight into trading a 150$ telescope for a little bag of legumes which are allegedly magic beans. At the end of the episodes, after Dwight plants the seeds into pots, Jim then swaps the pots of seeds with full-grown plants to keep the illusion. While Jim's prank keeps the illusion of the legumes being magical, at least it keeps Dwight happy and that he really won the jackpot rather than making him upset that he traded a telescope away for just regular legumes.
The Prankster: Though he usually limits himself to Dwight (or occasionally Andy). He tends to play pranks out of boredom, but occasionally because they're driving him crazy and pranking them allows him to turn their insanity into comedy. How sympathetic Jim is depends a lot on how funny his pranks are and how much the victims did to deserve them in each episode.
Precision F-Strike: Jim lets one out when Michael makes it clear he's dating Pam's mother. Funnily enough, he was cursing under his breath but the censor bleep made it sound more audible than it needed to.
Red Oni, Blue Oni: The Blue to Dwight, Michael and Andy's Red Onis.
The Rival:
To Dwight, though there are occasional moments where they get along.
During his brief stint as co-manager, Jim forms one with Michael. When Michael falls into a koi pond, Jim does nothing to help him because he was annoyed at Michael's one-sided idea of teamwork.
Roommate Com: While establishing Athlead, Jim and Darryl briefly try being roommates at an apartment in Philadelphia. Turns out Darryl is very neat and territorial while Jim is very slovenly and oversteps his boundaries.
Screw This, I'm Outta Here!:
After Pam rejects him in the season two finale, Jim - hurt by her rejection and not wanting to see her married to someone else - feels there's no reason for him to stay in Scranton and takes a promotion at Dunder-Mifflin's Stamford office to get a new start. He stays there in the first quarter of season three before coming back after Scranton absorbs the Stamford office.
In one episode Jim bites his lip every time he speaks. When it happens three times within the hour he loses his temper and declares that he's leaving early, right in the middle of a talking-head.
Second Love: To Pam — she was originally engaged to Roy, but after spending time with Jim more and more, getting tired of Roy's selfishness, and having a Green-Eyed Epiphany, she eventually became an Official Couple with Jim.
Seduction-Proof Marriage: Cathy tries to slip into Jim's bed, but he sees her coming and counters her at every turn, eventually getting Dwight to kill the mood.
Sibling Yin-Yang: When his two brothers make a first appearance in "Employee Transfer", it's clear that Jim is sweet, thoughtful, and encouraging in contrast to his brothers' mean (with a minor Pet the Dog moment), thoughtless, and discouraging attitudes.
Sitcom Arch-Nemesis: Dwight, naturally. Ryan also becomes one for Jim in Seasons 4 and 6.
Stepford Smiler: Jim is a snarker who enjoys lightening the mood with with pranks and jokes, and looks to be a fairly laid-back and easygoing guy. But in the season 4 episode "Money", he reveals to Dwight that for the entire time Pam was engaged to Roy, he was absolutely miserable and unable to enjoy much of anything.
Straight Man: Jim in particular serves to balance the insanity that is Michael Scott and Dwight Schrute.
Soul-Crushing Desk Job: While Jim is one of Dunder Mifflin's best employees, he hates working there because he finds selling paper to be incredibly dull. Eventually, he decides to join his friend from college in forming a sports marketing company.
Thousand-Yard Stare: Jim's reaction to Dwight and Angela kissing.
Took a Level in Jerkass: His co-manager arc in season 6 is intentionally written that way, as Jim becomes much more serious at work due to the new responsibilities he has gotten. He becomes less caring for the other office staff other than Pam, which culminates in him getting humbled and realizing what good Michael is really doing for the office.
Unresolved Sexual Tension: With Pam in the early seasons, especially in Season 2 when Pam's wedding date with Roy becomes official. A lot of critical speculation said that its resolution would destroy the show. Its continuing strength even after dealing with the UST is a testament to the writing team.
Unwitting Instigator of Doom: Jim accidentally convinced Pam's father to leave her mother. At their wedding, Pam's father brought his new sugar-baby along, understandably agitating Helene. Helene would then make the unwise decision to shack up with Michael, creating some unnecessary drama between Michael and Pam.
Vitriolic Best Buds: As noted above, his relationship with Dwight gradually evolves into one of these. Even before this, however, for all his pranking he typically shows more concern for Dwight than you'd expect. Presumably it wasn't for the pranks Jim wouldn't be quite so sympathetic to Dwight's problems.
Wacky Marriage Proposal: He proposed to Pam at a gas station. Outside. While it was raining. Despite the strange timing, she happily accepted. It helps that he promised to propose at a moment she'd least expect it and was leading her on for months before he finally popped the question.
Worthy Opponent: With Dwight.
Wrong Genre Savvy: When Jim gets transfered he starts pulling his pranks on Andy, clearly expecting to start up the same dynamic that he had with Dwight. Unfortunately for Jim he didn't count on Andy having genuine anger issues.
You Are in Command Now: Avoided. When Jo offers him the Regional Manager position sometime after Deangelo was incapacitated, Jim turns her down, reasoning that the Office was running smoothly enough without anyone needing to be in charge. It's also possible that he remembers the last time he had that position.