Actor Allusion: it’s mentioned that Phyllis was a cheerleader, Phyllis Smith was professional cheerleader with the St. Louis Cardinals.
Beware the Nice Ones: She's a nice enough lady, but she's not above blackmailing people like Angela when she's annoyed enough. Granted, it's Angela, so it's not entirely undeserved either.
Bitch in Sheep's Clothing: When she's off the clock, she averts this for the most part. However, she is a cunning stone cold bitch when it comes to staking a claim. After all, she works in sales.
She gets off on indirectly exerting power through her relationship with Bob. From 6x21 "Happy Hour":
Phyllis: Yeah, I love going to bars with Bob. I tend to wear something low-cut, get men to flirt with me, and Bob beats 'em up.
*beat*
Phyllis: What?
Phyllis also has a very prominent mean streak that comes out occasionally when dealing with Pam. When Pam and Jim's relationship became public, she makes an unneeded point to passive-aggressively 'inform' her she can't favor Jim when assigning new clients (something Pam wasn't doing) and does so loud enough for it to be heard by others. After Pam moved to Sales, Phyllis wasted no opportunity making mean-spirited digs at her for sniping her clients and takes part in the office's shunning of her, Michael, and Ryan. It even goes back to when she stole all of Pam's wedding plans for her own wedding, right down to the dress, essentially forcing Pam to sit through her own canceled wedding as a bystander.
Her blackmail of Angela should have been a case of The Dog Bites Back, but rather than use it to get Angela to be nicer to her, she forces Angela to remain on the committee and serve as Phyllis' punching bag, bullying and belittling her while assigning her any demeaning task she can. When Angela finally has enough, rather than accept she went too far, she outs Angela's affair to the office.
"Blackmail" Is Such an Ugly Word: Quips that bossing around Angela by holding the fact she is cheating on Andy with Dwight over her head does not count as blackmail because, in her opinion, in order for it to be "blackmail" you have to write it in a formal letter.
Butt-Monkey: Frequently the target of Michael's meaner jokes. Angela also gets her jollies slut-shaming Phyllis when Pam's not around.
Everyone Went to School Together: She was in high school with Michael.
Female Misogynist: Does not want the new manager to be a woman.
Happily Married: To Bob Vance, Vance Refrigeration.
Michael: See? There's hope for everyone!
I Was Quite a Looker: She used to be a professional cheerleader note , and mentions being in a sorority when she was in college.
Morality Pet: For Stanley. She's his only coworker he genuinely seems to like. When Karen complains about the smell Phyllis gives off, Stanley does a talking head pointing out he's sat opposite Phyllis for years and never said a word about it - maybe the only talking head he ever does where he isn't talking about himself or how much he hates working there. Phyllis defends Stanley in "Finale", claiming the documentary didn't capture his good side, and is visibly moved to tears by the whittled figurine he made for her. They're even shown dancing together at Dwight and Angela's wedding and admit how much they missed each other.
Nice Girl: Generally speaking, she's a sweet lady who's happily married, and is overall one of the most magnanimous people at Dunder Mifflin to her colleagues unless she's pushed: it's telling that a gift she makes for Michael is an oven mitt she lovingly knitted for him by hand. She does have her limits though: See Beware the Nice Ones and Bitch in Sheep's Clothing.
Odd Friendship: With Dwight, particularly in several Season 5 episodes.
Parental Abandonment: Phyllis gave away a baby in high school. When she suspects that Erin might be that baby, Phyllis starts warming up to her to make up for lost time.
Teenage Pregnancy: Late in Season 7 it's revealed Phyllis had a baby in high school and gave it up, with Erin possibly being that baby all grown up. It's quickly disproven and Phyllis' child is never acknowledged again.
Younger than She Looks: Michael refers to her as being the "Office Grandma" despite the fact that they're the same age, and went to high school together note . And before you call this joke mean-spirited, note that Smith is 11 years older than Carrell in real life. Ryan uses her face to sell his actual grandma's pesto because he thinks she has the Italian grandma look.