Addled Addict: Downplayed; later in the "VP" arc it's heavily implied that he develops an addiction to cocaine which is partly what fuels his increasingly desperate and incompetent conduct.
Advertised Extra: Ryan has been part of the opening credits since the first season despite being an ultimately minor character with shifts in role and personality to justify his place there. His inclusion in the opening credits was sometimes questioned in later seasons, as he's now considered to be even less significant than other characters whose actors are not mentioned in the opening credit. He has been removed from the opening in season 9, but only because his actor BJ Novak has left the show rather than acknowledging that Ryan's role had diminished.
The Artifact: He has been part of the opening credits since the first season despite being an ultimatey regular character with shifts in role and personality to justify his place there. There has been some Lampshade Hanging in the seventh season about how Ryan does not even have a real position in the office anymore nor does he bother to do any work. He has been removed from the opening as of season 9, but this is because BJ Novak has left the show rather than acknowledging that Ryan's role had diminished. Novak was actually a writer and executive producer for the show, and this was deliberate as he preferred having a somewhat smaller part to focus on the other jobs.
Awesome, but Impractical: A big problem with a lot of Ryan's business ideas is he focuses on making everything cutting edge, innovative, and cool without any concern as to whether the features are actually practical. Both Dwight and Jim question whether his new Dunder-Mifflin website really needs a social networking feature and Oscar points out that WUPHF's technology would be better as a service for emergency services to use for alerts than an app for people to send messages to each other.
Back for the Finale: Ryan is absent in season 9, save for returning in "Finale" when Ryan attends Dwight and Angela's wedding.
Bad Boss: His time as VP is characterised primarily by obnoxious arrogance, spiteful bullying, and increasingly incompetent and unethical conduct.
Beard of Evil: His rise to the heights of corporate executive and corresponding egotistical jerkassery are accompanied by the growth of increasingly douchey facial hair.
Big Bad: Of Season 4, after ascending to the VP position and letting his ego get the best of him. Also the straightest example in the series, due to him becoming an actual criminal in the process.
Birds of a Feather: A dysfunctional example with Kelly. They start off as Savvy Guy, Energetic Girl, but as the show goes on, it becomes clear that their relationship is The Masochism Tango because they are both vain, petty, superficial, and immature.
Bookends: The intros would always have a shot of Ryan holding up a garbage bag, which audiences assumed was filled with garbage unless they saw the "Basketball" episode, where it's clarified that the bag contains his basketball clothes. In the final season, Ryan is once again shown with a garbage bag, which he assures the cameras is filled with clothes.
Bullying a Dragon: When Jim is in charge, Ryan is obviously getting on his nerves, but despite the constant warning signs that Jim is at the end of his patience over Ryan not bothering to do things that are easy to knock out, he continues dismissing his superior, giving him sass and making illogical excuses for why he hasn't done anything, while playing Tetris on his work computer. Unsurprisingly, Jim humiliates him in front of the other employees by taking him to his new office - the repurposed break room storage closet - and slamming the door shut. The moment Ryan realizes this, his attitude does a fairly pathetic 180.
Can't Live with Them, Can't Live Without Them: His relationship with Kelly is this to a T. Whenever they're together, Ryan is completely disinterested in what Kelly wants in the relationship and will dump her as soon as something better comes along. But then when Kelly stops pining for him and shows interest in someone else, he attempts to win her back and succeeds, starting the cycle all over again.
Catchphrase: Whenever he shows up at the Scranton office in Season 4, he loudly proclaims "How's my favorite branch doing?" The longer the series progresses, the more smarmy and insincere it sounds.
Characterization Marches On: He started out as a generic, mild mannered rookie working his way through college but after being hired as a full time salesman, he becomes more snippy and sarcastic. After being promoted to VP of company sales, he became incredibly rude, selfish and egotistical. After being fired from his VP position and forced to become a temp again, he remained sarcastic and rude while also becoming openly uncaring about his job.
Color-Coded Characters: Most of his outfits are predominately blue or contain at least one item of blue. When he takes Jan's job, he starts wearing less items of blue, instead opting for darker colors.
Dark Is Evil: Well, "Dark Is A Massive Douchebag", anyway; his arc as VP and subsequent uptick in power-mad assholish egotism corresponds with a tendency to wear expensive black suits with matching black/dark coloured shirts. When he loses the VP job he maintains some of the jerkass tendencies but loses the intimidating get-up, to symbolise the fact that no one is going to put up with him throwing his weight around.
Deadpan Snarker: In the early seasons, this was one of his defining characteristics, particularly on the Confession Cam. He still maintained it to a degree even after he got Drunk with Power and let his ego run wild.
[Phyllis introduces Bob to the Dunder Mifflin staff]
Kevin: Kevin Malone.
Bob Vance: Bob Vance, Vance Refrigeration.
Stanley: Stanley Hudson.
Bob Vance: Bob Vance, Vance Refrigeration.
Ryan: Ryan Howard.
Bob Vance: Bob Vance, Vance Refrigeration.
Ryan: What line of work you in, Bob?
Didn't Think This Through: He was clearly desperate to make the website work, both because it was his brainchild and because if it failed, his job would have been on the line. But telling everyone to take the sales they made through their clients personally and credit them to the website as well (to make it look like the website was working) wouldn't have fooled anyone for more than a month at most. As soon as an accountant tried to reconcile sales figures with accounts receivable, the jig would have been up.
Drunk with Power: He very quickly starts throwing his weight around with his former co-workers and acting like an asshole after getting promoted to VP. This, of course, makes his ultimate downfall into positions lower than the one he was promoted from all the more humiliating for him, as few of the people he lorded over are inclined to think well of him when he comes crawling back.
Even the Guys Want Him: Lampshaded. Ryan confirms Angela's boyfriend is gay because he liked Ryan's pictures on facebook. At three in the morning. Not to mention Michael's man crush on him.
Everyone Has Standards: At one point, Creed asked for his help in setting up a blog. He instead set up a Word document disguised as a blog, to "protect the world from being exposed to Creed's brain". He describes the contents as being "pretty shocking, even for the Internet."
Face–Heel Revolving Door: After going to jail for fraud, he returns to Scranton as a member of the team. Since then, he's been switching between "member of the team" and "barely conceled manipulative malice" seemingly every other episode.
Faux Affably Evil: He tries to come off as funny and polite up until he gets even the slightest chance to stab his "friends" in the back.
Feigning Intelligence: As Regional VP, he turns out not so competent or confident in his position, and the use of "business buzzwords" doesn't hide it. It's even how he got the job in the first place, as he managed to wow David Wallace with his pitch about improving Dunder-Mifflin's performance through the internet and latest technology but had no idea how to properly implement these solutions to increase sales and revenue.
Foil:
To Michael. Both were put in management positions they were completely unsuited for. But while Michael attempted to make up for his shortcomings by being overly friendly towards his employees, Ryan became a complete jerk who was willing to break the law to hide his failures.
Also to Jim. Both hate working at a paper company as they see it as wasting their lives, both engage in on-again / off-again office romances with a female co-worker, both jump at the chance to be promoted in order to get out of the office only to make a mess of it, both have crushes on Pam, Jim in season 1 sees his job as temporary while season 1 Ryan is literally a temp etc. The difference is that Jim is a Jerk with a Heart of Gold who plays pranks on coworkers out of attention or boredom (and mostly against Dwight) but still values them as people, while Ryan is a shallow narcissist who acts polite to others on the surface but doesn't actually care about anyone but himself except, to a limited extent, those who care about him.
His character arc has him swing in the opposite direction to Andy. Andy started out as a hotshot, but eventually became a nice guy who rose to a management position. Ryan started out as an introvert who then became a hotshot and ended up hitting rock bottom. Both also show an attraction to Erin, but Andy's interest seems genuine while Ryan is clearly just looking for a score.
Former Sane Man: Ryan starts off as a fairly grounded temp at the Scranton branch of Dunder Mifflin, but after a meteoric rise and fall from grace at the company he becomes an immature poser, who spends the rest of the show either locked in a mutually toxic relationship with Kelly, or constantly trying to swindle his fellow employees with hairbrained schemes which he inevitably fails to follow through on.
The Friend Nobody Likes: Especially in later seasons, no one in the office cares at all for him, save Michael's creepy man-crush on him, his Relationship Revolving Door with Kelly and the hints of an Odd Friendship with Toby. In season 8, everyone encourages Kelly to date Ravi, simply because he's not Ryan and anyone is better than him (Pam outright tells Ryan that he's not a good person, and even the ones who never met Ravi prefer him over Ryan). In "The Fire", Dwight mercilessly mocks him after finding out that the fire in the office was caused when Ryan made a dumb mistake in the break room (using the wrong setting on the toaster oven), and no one steps up to defend him, not even Michael. Later, after he conned his way to management and acted like an asshole to everyone - coming up with a business plan that would potentially make all the sales staff redundant - he burned all his bridges. Even Michael and Kelly gradually got fed up with how much of a Jerkass he is.
Darryl: Oh, in the warehouse we use code names for people we want to talk about. Andy was Jelly Roll. Mike was Dennis the Menace. Ryan was douchebag.
Ryan: Hey, that's not a code name. That's just an insult.
Oscar: Plus everyone would know who you meant.
The Generic Guy: During the first two seasons his defining characteristic was being The New Guy. He finally got more focus starting in Season 3.
Going Native: Ryan was one of the most sane people in the beginning of the show; As of season 6, he has his own "quirks" like everyone else, probably from just accepting being stuck in the office for his life.
Good Hair, Evil Hair: He grows a Beard of Evil after being promoted and promptly shaved it off when he realized Michael was growing one to mimic him.
Hate Sink: Starting with season 3 and reaching its apex in season 4. Ryan becomes increasingly more arrogant and condescending to everyone around him, culminating him abusing his power as VP and getting the entire office unwittingly involved in an embezzlement scheme.
Zig-zagged for the rest of the series. Ryan has some friendlier moments (him bonding with Michael and Pam in season 5, or him pulling the plug on his latest money-making scheme in season 7), but in general he's the same narcissistic asshole as before, and it gets to the point that even Michael reaches his limit with him.
Ryan hits his zenith in the finale, when he feeds a strawberry to a baby with a food allergy and then abandons him so he can run off with Kelly once more.
Hey, You!: In the early seasons, a lot of his co-workers just called him "Temp" or "the Temp". Stanley refers to him as "the kid" at least once. Creed still refers to him as "the Temp" even after he got promoted to VP, although Creed tends to not remember anyone's name.
Hidden Depths: Apparently he is quite the poet. In "Angry Andy" when Kelly gets a new boyfriend, he is jealous and writes a poem about her. He refuses to read it when Pam asks him to, however she and Jim dig it out of the trash and upon reading it start crying (though it's implied to be pretty awful regardless).
Hipster: He has settled into this characterization starting in the sixth season.
If I Can't Have You…: He's almost a perfect version of this when it comes to Kelly:
Ryan: Maybe we weren't right together but... it's weird. I'd rather she be alone than be with someone. Is that love?
Informed Ability: He is sometimes credited as being clever or talented for how far he got in the company but in actuality his ideas were all stolen and unsuccessful. Even the website idea actually came from Dwight attributing his failure as a salesman coming from companies leaning more on the internet over time.
Informed Attractiveness: Ryan as "hottest in the office." It's mostly Michael and Kelly's crushes on him that inform this, and Ryan himself. Michael describes him in his diary as "just as hot as Jan but in a different way".
It's Not Porn, It's Art: Ryan's photography.
Jerkass: Simply keeping to himself and avoiding attention from his co-workers, he stops coming off as shy by season 3. Turned into a complete douchebag the next season. Now he doesn't hold back and is openly sarcastic. Even in earlier seasons, while it's more downplayed, his shyness and awkwardness around the others in the office can start to come off as a form of aloof superiority, and he states on several occasions that he wants to avoid forming real connections to those at Dunder-Mifflin in a way that suggests he feels he's above it.
Jerkass Has a Point:
While it's clear he's a Know-Nothing Know-It-All most of the time, he's correct that the primary reason for Dunder-Mifflin's struggles is that the company refuses to pivot its business strategy towards a marketplace that is becoming more and more paperless. Similarly, his idea to upgrade the Dunder-Mifflin website is a good one, as when Jim shows the current site to the camera crew, it's completely outdated and nonfunctional even by the standards of 2007. The problem is he goes over-the-top with it, lashes out at people when it proves more difficult than he thinks, and ends up willing to go to unethical lengths to make it seem more successful than it is.
He's not wrong on how Michael's behavior is often wildly inappropriate.
Ryan had every right to be mad at Kelly for lying about being pregnant just to go on a date with him.
When giving Jim a verbal warning, he's not entirely wrong that Jim isn't exactly the most motivated person around Dunder-Mifflin and could probably make more sales if he put more effort and enthusiasm into his job, but the warning itself is clearly based on spite, envy and insecurity over Jim's criticisms of his website initiative and better relationship with David, and he subsequently goes way overboard in targeting him.
Know-Nothing Know-It-All: Throughout the first two seasons he would talk about the things he had learned in business school, suggesting that he was knowledgeable in the field than his older co-workers. However, it soon becomes exceedingly clear he has no idea what he's doing as he is a failure as a salesman and his website fails to attract any customers. When Michael hires him for his own startup business, Ryan's expense projections are shown to be quite faulty, as he made predictions based on fixed costs rather than anticipating the rise in expenses that would accompany the growth in business.
Manchild: Compared to Michael, who's like a really dense 12-year-old, Ryan is more comparable to a 14-year-old who's fairly bright but has no awareness of how the world really works or his own flaws and limitations.
Narcissist: Ryan is completely focused on himself and has little to no regard to those around him; he shows he is willing to lie and commit fraud in order to cover up his failures, despite this only exacerbating them when he is caught; after Michael gives him a job in the office again after being fired as Vice President and arrested for said fraud, Ryan feigns reform while secretly keeping a list of everyone he thinks has wronged him (even just for snarky remarks) and plotting to ruin their careers once he climbs up the corporate ladder again (which he never does); he eventually sinks so low as to deliberately poison his own infant son, whom he quickly abandons, just so he can hook up with Kelly again, and he is only concerned with her out of jealousy that she found a new boyfriend. He is shallow, vain, lazy, vindictive, manipulative, condescending, callous, two-faced and basically an all-round jerk who puts on a transparent facade of being a decent person, which he abandons whenever he gets status or even the illusion thereof.
Nerd Glasses: Ryan starts wearing big thick rimmed glasses after they started becoming trendy.
Obviously Unqualified: In "The Job", David Wallace appoints Ryan to the open position of Vice President of Sales in Dunder Mifflin’s New York office, despite Ryan being an intern in Scranton (and a notoriously lazy one at that), seemingly purely on the basis that he alone among the candidates has a (very recent) MBA. His unsuitability for the job becomes more than apparent in the next season.
Only Sane Man: Early on he had this role, even sometimes acting as the Audience Surrogate.
The Peter Principle: Played with. On paper he's a good example of this, because he has far more qualifications than anyone else in the office which might seemingly make him perfect for a promotion into Corporate, but screws up once he's there. However, there are several signs that he's not well-suited for the job in the first place — most tellingly, it's established that after being made a salesman at Dunder-Mifflin he never manages to make a single sale. Unlike Michael, a genuinely talented salesman who was over-promoted to manager, Ryan doesn't even have that.
Pointy-Haired Boss: In season 4. He tries to cover it up with excessive use of office buzz words and hip terminology, but he obviously has no idea what he is doing.
Put on a Bus: Left the office to pursue Kelly in season 9, though he came Back for the Finale.
Right for the Wrong Reasons: His focus on the company website during his management arc is essentially this. He's not wrong that Dunder Mifflin needs to shift online in order to become more competitive in an increasingly paperless world, but it's pretty clear that his focus on this is largely if not solely because he has pretensions of being a dotcom / tech-bro genius of the Steve Jobs ilk, and views the website as a way of accomplishing this rather than keeping it inline with the actual business requirements of a paper / stationery company (tellingly, one of his big focuses on the website is a redundant and even damaging social media function, and he launches it with a flashy online livestream as if it were an iPhone announcement).
Small Name, Big Ego: One attribute he's picked up from Michael. Despite being a mediocre manager and a piss poor salesman who ended up going to prison shortly after making it to corporate, he carries himself like he's Warren Buffett.
Took a Level in Jerkass:
Shortly after dating Kelly, Ryan becomes increasingly disdainful of the people around him. A key moment being when he told Kelly flat-out that he didn't have any long-term plans for them and she ran off in tears. When Pam called Ryan out, he curtly told her he had no regrets. This is lampshaded at one point, where Jim notes that he liked Ryan a lot better when Ryan was just a temp, to which Ryan can only agree. This carries over into Season 3 after his few attempts at kissing up to Dwight and Stanley backfire on him and he competes with Jim for his old desk. The final scene was Ryan accepting a corporate job and gleefully ending his relationship with Kelly without even looking at her.
In season 4. He puts on an air of friendliness that he never displayed before while pitching a restructure of the company that could jeopardize his former co-worker's job security. When Ryan's attempt at creating an online shopping option doesn't take off as quickly as he'd hoped, he forces the staff to do overtime hours where they'd credit their sales to the site. Oscar notes that this is a felony and Ryan pays for it by the end of the season. Not to mention his habit of going to parties and taking drugs while everyone else had to stay back late.
From Season 5 up until the finale, Ryan gives hot and cold signals to Kelly. He successfully gets back into her good graces, only to make her dump Darryl and give him money so he can go travelling. After Kelly finds a better suitor, Ryan openly admits that he doesn't want her to be happy if it means he gets nothing out of it. In the finale, Ryan gets Kelly back once more by endangering a baby's life.
Took a Level in Dumbass: He starts off as a smart student who is also reasonable enough to be the Only Sane Man. His intelligence gets more and more questionable as the show develops, due to his lack of talent when it comes to closing sales. This gets especially noticable in Season 4 when he starts taking drugs. In later seasons, after burning out, he's just an incompetent and immature Small Name, Big Ego.
Two First Names: His first and last name can both be used as a given name for a male.
What, Exactly, Is His Job?: His positions at the office were clearly shown throughout the first five seasons, but in the sixth season he phased into having no clearly indicated position in the office. The seventh season episode 'The Inner Circle' lampshades this and has him temporarily pretend to be Kelly's supervisor for Deangelo to give the appearance that he actually does work at the office. What's more, Jim eventually exiles him to the supply closet and that's where he stays for the rest of his run on the show.
White-Collar Crime: Ends up misleading Dunder Mifflin's shareholders (aka committing fraud) when his website fails.